Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and
Application
Mithun Kumar Acharjee
University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL
Email: acharjee@uab.edu
Kumer Das
University of Louisiana at Lafayette, LA
Email: kumer.das@louisiana.edu
January 2, 2023

Abstract
To deal with non-linear relations between the predictors and the
response, we can use transformations to make the data look linear or
approximately linear. In practice, however, transformation methods
may be ineffective, and it may be more efficient to use flexible regression
techniques that can automatically handle nonlinear behavior. One such
method is the Polynomial Spline (PS) regression. Because the number
of possible spline regression models is many, efficient strategies for
choosing the best one are required. This study investigates the different
spline regression models (Polynomial Spline based on Truncated Power,
B-spline, and P-Spline) in theoretical and practical ways. We focus on
the fundamental concepts as the spline regression is theoretically rich.
In particular, we focus on the prediction using cross-validation (CV)
rather than interpretation, as polynomial splines are challenging to
interpret. We compare different PS models based on a real data set
and conclude that the P-spline model is the best.

Keywords: Polynomial Spline Regression, B-spline, P-Spline, Polynomial
Spline based on Truncated Power, Smoothing Matrix
Introduction

Analyzing the data with linear regression models is not always sufficient.
This fact has already been proven in different fields of science,especially
when dealing with complex relationships such as weather data and physical
relations [1–5]. This insufficiency is largely due to uncertainty about the
specific form of an effect that a covariate has on the response or theoretical
considerations about the application [1]. Variable transformations and the
use of polynomials are two prevalent methods for dealing with this nonlinearity. In practice, we have very few transformations. Therefore, the
Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
mathematical form of the response and the predictor variable is not only
limited but also inflexible [6]. Furthermore, polynomial regressions need to
be more flexible to capture sudden changes in slope, especially at irregular
intervals. Polynomial regressions tend to fail in high dimensions due to
perfect multicollinearity (since we are adding covariate squares, covariate
cubes, etc.). To overcome this situation, statisticians developed a novel
polynomial spline regression approach.
Spline regression works in two phases: the first phase ensures the partition
of the domain of predictor variables into intervals, whereas the second phase
estimates the polynomials separately in each interval. This two-phase procedure makes the polynomial spline model more flexible in low dimensions
and less likely to generate perfect multicollinearity in higher dimensions [8].
Spline models are theoretically vibrant, which led us to investigate different
types of spline models. The main idea of the truncated polynomial (TP)
based polynomial splines (PS) is to define local polynomials on intervals in
the domain of the predictor variable. Also, to ensure smoothness, we need
the functions to be continuous and differentiable at the interval boundaries.
Despite some advantages of TP spline (such as easy understanding and simple calculation procedure), researchers are still looking for a better approach.
Instead, they proposed the B-spline or basic spline, which resolves the numerical instability and co-linearity problems due to relatively closer knots.
B-splines have beneficial properties, especially the derivatives of the basis
function. This property has an enormous advantage in spline regression,
where some significant results are discussed in this paper. Before developing the regularization-based penalty splines, one of the questions that need
to be answered is: what is the number of knots? To get around this question, the P-spline approximates the function f (z) with a polynomial spline
that uses many knots (usually about 20–40) [6]. Even in the case of highly
complex functions, this guarantees that f (z) can be approximated with sufficient flexibility and then use the penalized least square criteria to avoid
over-fitting.
While piecewise polynomials have been used to model regression functions
for a long time [9–13], their application to non-parametric regression, or
smoothing, is relatively new [14]. A regression spline smoothing involves
transforming a regression function into a piecewise polynomial with a high
number of pieces relative to the sample size. Regression spline smoothing
involves modeling a regression function as a piecewise polynomial with many
pieces relative to the sample size. A wide range of possible fits is possible
due to the arbitrary number of polynomial pieces and the location of the
knots. Because of the high number of candidate models, this flexibility poses
a challenging model selection problem.
The study aims to achieve three specific objectives. First, we review different
PS models (TP-based PS, B-spline, and P-spline) and discuss the theoretical concepts, especially the model formulation, parameter estimation, and
important properties. Second, we investigate the use of these methods in
modeling atmospheric pressure data, where we focused on the prediction
using a more objective approach, namely cross-validation, which aims to
minimize the mean square prediction error [16]. Lastly, to overcome the
challenging model selection problem, we compare our models based on the
six different model selection criteria and suggest the best fitted model.
The rest of this article is organized into four sections: Section 2 describes
the mathematical theory and properties of different spline models. Section
3 describes the data set and the steps to analyze the data. Section 4 provides the results of the analysis, while Section 5 describes and compares the
findings with concluding remarks.

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
3

Statistical Methods: Polynomial Spline

The idea of the polynomial spline is closely related to polynomial regression. The polynomial regression models the covariate effects on response. A
classical polynomial model can be written as:
f (zi ) = γ0 + γ1 zi + · · · + γl zil

(2.1)

If we increase the degrees of the polynomial, the estimated nonlinear function
f (z) looks very wiggly. To make this polynomial smoother, we can partition
the covariates domain into different intervals. Secondly, for each interval, we
can estimate the polynomials. Thus a function f (z) is a polynomial spline
of degree l ≥ 0 with knots a = k1 < · · · < km = b satisfies the following two
conditions [6]:
1. f (z) is continuously differentiable (l − 1) times. In the case of l = 1,
the function is only continuous (not differentiable). We do not need
any smoothness requirements for l = 0.
2. f (z) is a polynomial of degree l on the intervals [kj , kj+1 ) defined by
the knots.
In this spline regression, the degree l indicates the overall smoothness, while
the number of knots controls the number of piece-wise polynomials. There
are different approaches to the polynomial spline. Some of them are discussed below.

2.1

Polynomial spline (PS) based on truncated power (TP)

Let the standard form of the TP-based polynomial:
yi = γ1 + γ2 zi + · + γl+1 zil + γl+2 (zi − k2 )l+ + γl+m−1 (zi − km−1 )l+ + i (2.2)
where,
(
(z − kj )l
(z − kj )l+ =
if z ≥ kj
if z < kj

This model has two parts: The first part is a knot-free polynomial having
l degree, which is also referred to as a global polynomial. The second part
includes the knots referred to as local polynomials. In a local polynomial, the
coefficient changes with the change of knots. We use this local polynomial in
every interval, ensuring global smoothness. In TP-based polynomial spline,
we first calculate (or draw) all the scale functions separately, and finally,
we add all of them to get the estimate of f (z). Thus, the final form of the
TP-based PS is:
yi =

d
X

γj Bj (zj ) + i = f (zi ) + i

(2.3)

j=1

where,
B1 (z) = 1, B2 (z) = z, . . . , Bl+1 (z) = z l , Bl+2 (z) = (z−k2 )l+ , . . . , Bd (z) = (z−km−1 )l+ .
Here, the TP based polynomial is expressed as a linear combination of the
d = l + m − 1 functions where m = k + 1.

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
It is essential to know the number and position of the knots in spline regression. There is no “rule of thumb” for determining the number of knots. Howˆ
ever, we can tell that if the number is high, we can get a more flexible f (z)
(more wiggly) and vice-versa. On the other hand, the position of the knot
is determined by different approaches, such as equidistant knots, quantilebased knot. However, these approaches cannot talk about the number of
knots. This problem is solved by using the regularization of the estimation
problem using penalty knots which will be discussed in section 2.3.
The TP basis spline functions are not bounded. As a result, calculating the
TP basis functions can lead to numerical instabilities for higher values of
covariates. On the other hand, if the knots are very close to each other, the
TP-basis function shows high collinearity. One can solve this problem by
using the basic spline or B-spline.

2.2

B-spline:

B-spline basis function having l degrees consists of (l + 1) polynomial pieces,
which are added in an (l -1) times continuously differentiable way. The form
of the basis function is:
d
X
f (z) =
γj Bj (z).
(2.4)
j=1

Here, for l = 0, we can deduce the definition for B-spline as follows:
Bj0 (z) = I(kj ≤ z < kj+1 ).

(2.5)

Where,
(
I(kj ≤ z < kj+1 ) =
if kj ≤ z < kj+1
if O.W.

If we deduce the definition for l = 1, we get the following form [15]:
Bj1 (z) =

z − kj−1
kj−1 − z
I(kj−1 ≤ z < kj ) +
I(kj ≤< kj+1 ).
kj − kj−1
kj+1 − kj

(2.6)

where the two linear segments of the basis function is
[kj−1 , kj ).
and
[kj , kj+1 ).
Similarly, the B-splines of order l (in a general expression) can be defined
recursively as:
Bjl (z) =

z − kj−l l−1
kj+1 − z
Bj−1 (z) +
B l−1 (z).
kj − kj−l
kj+1 − kj+1−l j

(2.7)

One of the critical properties of the B-spline is the derivative property. Since
each basis function includes the polynomial term, it is necessary to determine
its derivatives. These derivatives reveal a simple relationship between the
derivative of a spline function and the B-splines of degree one less; the

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
calculation details for this can be seen in [15]. The derivative of the general
expression form is:
∂ l
1
l−1
Bj (z) = l.(
Bj−1
B l−1 (z)).
(z) −
∂z
kj − kj−l
kj+1 − kj+1−l

(2.8)

Now, to get the derivative of the entire polynomial spline, we sum the equation (2.8), where the final form is as follows [15]:
d

X γj − γj−1
∂ X
γj Bj (zj ) = l.
B l−1 (z).
∂z
kj − kj−1 j−1

(2.9)

j=1

This is the expression for the first-order derivatives using first-order differences of the coefficients and the basic function of the lower order [15]. This
important result will use in the P-spline in the next section.
Another important property of the B-spline is the unity decomposition
meaning the sum of the rows of the design matrix is 1; this can be shown
from the definition of the splines in [15]. That is,
d
X

Bj (z) = 1.

j=1

As a result, the design matrix has no intercept column where the expression
of the design matrix is:

 l
B1 (z1 ) . Bdl (z1 )
.
.
.
Z= .
l
l
B1 (zn ) . Bd (zn )

2.3

Penalized splines (P-Splines)

As seen in the previous subsection, the number of knots significantly impacts the estimation. In this subsection, we discuss how we can control this
number using the idea of penalization. Briefly, penalization means we first
use a sizeable generous number of knots, ensuring that our function is well
estimated. Then, we add a penalty to avoid over-fitting and minimize a
penalized least square (PLS) criterion.
2.3.1

P-splines based on TP basis

As seen from the model based on the TP basis equation (2.2), the l + 1
basis functions in this equation are just the global polynomial, and starting
from the l + 2 term, we have the truncated polynomials which describe
deviation from this polynomial. Therefore, adding a penalty on over-fitting
is equivalent to adding a penalty on the corresponding truncated polynomial
Pd
coefficients. This can be expressed as a penalty on this sum
j=l+2 γj ,
which means that large coefficients are penalized. Then we estimate the
coefficients by using least squares with the additional penalization term
P LS(λ) =

n
X
i=1

(yi −

d
X
j=1
(γj B(zi ))) + λ

d
X
j=l+2

γj2

(2.10)

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
where λ ≥ 0 is called the smoothing parameter. As λ increases, the estimated coefficients for the truncated polynomial basis will decrease, making
the plot smoother. As λ goes to infinity, the penalized terms will go to zero,
and the f (z) estimate approaches an l-degree polynomial. Thus, by varying
λ, we can control the smoothness of the plot. One big advantage of this
approach is that after a certain number of knots, our estimation will not be
affected by increasing the knots if we choose λ optimally. Therefore, this
explains why this approach is to control the number of knots.
2.3.2

P-splines based on B-splines basis:

The penalty for truncated polynomials was evident because the basis for
the global polynomial and the knot part are separate in the model formula.
On the other hand, the penalty for B-splines is less obvious because the
basis is formed in a way in which the global polynomial and the truncated
polynomials are merged in each term [16]. Thus, we must think here from
another perspective: how to smooth the overall estimated function. To
characterize the smoothness of any function, using (squared) derivatives is
appropriate since this represents the variability in the function.
R 00For example,
we can add a penalty on the second derivative, such as λ (f (z))2 dz. To
do that, we can return to the derivative form of the B-spline estimated
function equation (2.9). We notice from this formula that the first derivative
is written in terms of the first differences of the corresponding coefficient
vector; therefore, adding a penalty on the first derivative is equivalent to
adding a penalty on the first differences of the coefficient vector. In general,
to add a penalty based on the rth order derivatives, we can use differences
of a higher-order r. This can be expressed in the penalized residual sum of
squares
P LS(λ) =

n
X
i=1

where

(yi −

d
X

(γj B(zi )))2 + λ

j=1

d
X

(∆r γj )2

(2.11)

j=r+1

∆1 γj = γj − γj−1 & ∆r γj = ∆r−1 γj − ∆r−1 γj−1

Note here that as λ goes to infinity, the fit approaches a polynomial of
degree r − 1 with rth order differences (of course, assuming l). Therefore,
this is one other advantage of the B-spline. In contrast to the truncated
polynomial basis, which will always be of degree l, the B-spline basis adds
extra flexibility to choose the degree of the splines used for modeling f (z)
by changing the order of difference used. This provides us with additional
freedom in the modeling process.
2.3.3

Penalized least square estimation

To solve the PLS equation, it is very convenient to write it in a matrix
form because this will provide us with a general form for both TP and Bspline approaches. Also, we will see that this form works for any general
penalization approach. For the case of TP basis, we can write
λ

d
X
j=l+2
γj2 = λγ Kγ

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
0

where γ = (γ1 , ..., γd ) & K = diag(0, ..., 0, 1, ..., 1) with (l + 1) zeros and
(m − 2) ones. For the case of B spline, we can define difference matrices as


−1 1
,
.
.
D1 = 
−1 1
such that

D1 γ = (γ2 − γ1 , ..., γd − γd−1 )T

and define the order rth difference matrix as Dr = D1 Dr−1 . Then this yields
the penalty
d
X
0
λ
(∆r γj )2 = λγ Dr Dr γ = λγ Kr γ,
j=r+1

where Kr is called the rth order difference penalty matrix. Then generally,
the PLS can be written as
P LS(λ) = (y − Zγ) (y − Zγ) + λγKγ

(2.12)

Therefore, the estimated coefficient vector which minimizes the PLS is
γ̂ = (Z 0 Z + λK)−1 Z 0 y.

(2.13)

Notice that although this estimate is biased, it can be shown that if we
chose λ appropriately, the overall mean square error would be smaller in the
case of the penalized estimation than in the unpenalized case. So it is a
better estimator in terms of the bias-variance trade-off. Another interesting
perspective of this penalization procedure can be shown if we assume the γi
as martingale random variables and use random walks and Bayes estimation.
This will lead to the same formula of estimation.
2.3.4

The smoothing matrix

Here we discuss a concept that will help us compute some important statistical properties like an estimation of error variance and confidence intervals.
First, apply the Basis formula (TP or B-spline) to all observations and create
a design matrix Z. We can write y = Zγ +  and therefore
ŷ = f ˆ
(z) = Z γ̂ = Z(Z 0 Z + λK)−1 Z 0 y = Sy
where

S = Z(Z 0 Z + λK)−1 Z 0

(2.14)

is called the smoothing matrix, which we can think of as a generalization
for the H matrix in linear models. To predict a future point, we can use
ˆ = z 0 (Z 0 Z + λK)−1 Z 0 y = s(z)0 y,
f (z)
where Z is the vector of basis functions evaluated at z. Thus, using this
ˆ = s(z)0 y, we can calculate the form of confidence intervals, but
form f (z)
first, we need to assume that the errors are normally distributed.Then, we
can calculate the variance of a single observation and the covariance of the
joint distribution as:
ˆ = σ 2 s(z)0 s(z)
V ar(f (z)

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
and
Cov(fˆr ) = σ 2 Sr Sr0 .

Using the Central limit theorem, we can calculate these confidence Intervals.
Pointwise confidence intervals with level α is
p
ˆ ±z
f (z)
1−α/2 σ s(z) s(z)
and the Simultaneous confidence bands(Bonferroni) is
q
ˆj) ± z
f (z
1−α/2r σ s(zj ) s(zj )
and the Simultaneous confidence based on the joint distribution of (f (z1 ), . . . , f (zr ))0
is
q
ˆ j ) ± m1−α σ s(zj )0 s(zj )
f (z
where m1−α is determined via simulation, and it defines the 1 − α quantile
of the distribution of the random variable:
ˆ j ) − f (zj )
f (z
max1<j<r | p
|
σ s(zj )0 s(zj )
In all confidence intervals, we can replace σ 2 with σˆ2 for a large number of
observations.
2.3.5

Estimation of σ 2 and method of choosing λ

To find an unbiased estimator for σ 2 , it can be shown algebraically that
E(

n
n
X
X
(yi − f ˆ
(z)))2 = (n − tr(2S − SS 0 ))σ 2 +
b2i
i=1

i=1

where bi is the bias of the function estimate at the point zi . If we assume that
the smoother is approximately unbiased, then we can define the equivalent
degrees of freedom as edf = tr(2S − SS 0 ), which can be approximated by
edf = tr(S),

(2.15)

where S is the smoothness matrix, then
n

σˆ2 =

X
ˆ 2
( (yi − f (z)))
n − edf

(2.16)

i=1

Now we can show how to choose λ; first, we should define our optimality
criterion, which will be the mean square prediction error(MSE); this is the
sum of the bias and variance. It follows that minimizing the mean square can
be done by minimizing the cross-validation criteria. So this means choosing
the λ, which minimizes
n

CV =

1X
ˆ i ))2 ,
(yi − f −i (z
n
i=1

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
where f −iˆ(zi ) denotes the estimation function when removing observation
i, this can be shown to be equal to
n
ˆ i)
1 X yi − f (z
)2 ,
CV =
(
n
1 − sii

(2.17)

i

where sii are the diagonal elements of the smoothing matrix S, we can think
of this as the leverage from the H matrix in linear modeling. This can be
justified theoretically by the fact that the expected value of CV is the mean
square prediction error:
n

E(CV ) ≈

1X
ˆ i ))2 ,
(yn+i − f (z
n
i=1

where yn+i is a new observation at point zi . Another method to choose λ is
to use the AIC criterion where the generalized AIC equation, in this case,
can be shown to be
AIC = nlog(σˆ2 ) + 2(edf + 1)

(2.18)

where the edf replaces the number of parameters in the AIC form in the
unpenalized case. The third way is to estimate λ as a parameter inside the
model; this can be seen from the Bayesian point of view (discussed in the
technical part) because from the Bayesian perspective, λ = στ 2 , where τ 2 is
the prior variance assumed for the random walk. Thus, this can be treated
as a parameter inside a mixed model and use the estimated procedures of
mixed models to estimate both σ 2 and τ 2 [17].
Data and Methods

The data are monthly averaged atmospheric pressure differences between
Easter Island and Darwin, Australia. The data was collected for 168 months
from both islands. Here, the response variable is the monthly averaged atmospheric pressure differences between Easter Island and Darwin, Australia.
The predictor variable is the vector of time values. The data is collected
from the NIST Standard Reference Database 140 [2]. It has been analyzed
before using periodic functions, and the reported result for the sum square
errors was 788 [2].
First, we checked the linearity of the data using a residual versus fitted
plot and added the “loess” curve, see Figure 1. Exploratory data analysis suggested that the data was nonlinear. Then we fitted the different PS
models. Because PS models are complicated to interpret, we focused here
on the prediction. Thus, we performed a cross-validation method by partitioning our data into two groups: the training set (80% observations) and
the test set (20% observations). We performed three PS models (TP-based
PS, B-spline, and P-spline based on B-spline) for different degrees, knots,
and orders of derivatives for smoothing. We applied all these models to
the training data. We recorded all the comparison criteria, such as AIC,
BIC, R2 , PRESS residuals, and cross-validated mean squared prediction error (CVMSPE). For the P-spline, a more stable and numerically preferable
Generalized cross-validation criteria was used as suggested in the R function “gam” in the mgcv library [6]. Later, we apply the models in the test
data to understand how well the models predict based on the Mean Square

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
prediction Error (MSE) values. We choose the best model from each set of
polynomial spline models (one from TP-based PS, one from B-spline, and
one from P-Spline). We compare these three models based on the abovementioned criteria and select the best PS model. It is also important to note
that all the analyses are carried out using an equidistant knot approach. We
perform the data analysis using R [18].
Results

4.1

Detecting non-linearity

Figure 4.1: Detecting non-linearity: Atm. Pressure vs. Time plot (left
panel) and estimated residual vs. fitted values (right panel)
From Figure 4.1 we can tell that the data are very scattered, which shows
the non-linearity pattern between the atm. pressure and time variable. The
right graph indicates that the loess curve (red line) is more precise at the
beginning, but after Ŷ = 500, the predicted atmospheric pressure, the loess
curve is less precise. Also, the Loess curve does not coincide with the horizontal error line, indicating that a non-linearity pattern exists.

4.2

Model comparison

We experimented with three models using a different number of knots, different degrees of polynomials, and different orders of differentiation (this
is applicable only for P-spline). We compare the models based on different criteria. The detailed results are given in Tables 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 (see
Appendix).

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
Based on six different model selection criteria, we choose our best model
from the three different PS models shown in Tables 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3. The
following table shows the best model from the three methods used.
Table 4.1: Comparing models based on the different model selection criteria
PS Models
PSM based on TP
B-spline
P-spline

knots
2
degrees
41
Diff.Order
—
—
AIC
248
BIC
378
R2
0.98
0.97
0.76

PRESS resid.
776
CVMSPE(Train.)
6.97
6.9
4.9

Table 4.1 indicates that the AIC, Press Residuals, CVMSPE, and MSE are
the lowest for P-spline regression. Though the R2 is not high compared to
the other model, we consider here P-spline as the best model. One possible
explanation is that our focus is on the prediction, and we rely more on the
values of CVMSPE and MSE.

Figure 4.2: Plot of the best fitted model (P-spline) based on the training
data (red points) and test data (blue points)
Figure 4.2 shows the fit of the best-fitted model (P-spline model) based on
the training data set (red points) and test data set (blue points). It shows
that the overall fit follows the pattern in the data and covers most of the
points.

MSE (Test)
40
8.6

Polynomial Spline Regression: Theory and Application
Figure 4.3: Residual vs Fitted graph for the best-fitted model (P-spline
model)
Figure 4.3 shows the residual vs. fitted plot for the best model. Here
the errors have no usual pattern meaning that errors are homoscedastic
and are approximately independent. From here, we can assume that errors
are approximately normally distributed, which will help us to construct a
confidence interval based on the normality assumptions.
Conclusion

Overall, the second-degree polynomial gives better results in these three
methods. In addition, since the data are very scattered, the fit improves
as the number of knots increases. However, when we used P-splines, the fit
tended to saturate after the number of knots exceeded 80, which is in line
with the theory that the fit is not affected by the number of knots after
some point. Also, it is essential to note that this data has a periodic trend,
so if we try to predict a future value, we should consider this by repeating
this fit periodically rather than just extending the polynomial after the last
knot. This suggests that, for future improvements, periodic functions can
be used with PS methods.