Anticipation of Method Execution in Mixed Consistency Systems
– Technical Report
Marco Giunti, Hervé Paulino and António Ravara∗
NOVA LINCS & NOVA School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon
Portugal
marco.giunti@gmail.com,{herve.paulino,aravara}@fct.unl.pt

ABSTRACT
Distributed applications often deal with data with different consistency requirements: while a post in a social network only requires
weak consistency, the user balance in turn has strong correctness
requirements, demanding mutations to be synchronised. To deal
efficiently with sequences of operations on different replicas of the
distributed application, it is useful to know which operations commute with others and thus, when can an operation not requiring
synchronisation be anticipated wrt other requiring it, thus avoiding
unnecessary waits.
Herein we present a language-based static analysis to extract
at compile-time from code information on which operations can
commute with which other operations and thus get information that
can be used by the run-time support to decide on call anticipations
of operations in replicas without compromising consistency. We
illustrate the formal analysis on several paradigmatic examples and
briefly present a proof-of-concept implementation in Java.
INTRODUCTION

Many Internet services replicate their data across multiple sites to
improve availability, fault-tolerance and scalability. Data consistency in such systems is bound to the order on which operations
are executed at each site, resulting in a tension between correctness and performance. Concerned about the latter, some datastores [1, 9, 14, 17, 20] avoid global synchronization by resorting
to weaker consistency semantics, allowing replicas to temporarily
diverge [3]. There are however some operations (such as a withdraw from a bank account) whose correctness requires consistency
guarantees that cannot be specified in weakly consistent solutions.
Consider the example of coordinating operations over bank accounts replicated at several sites, depicted in Fig. 1.1 From the
perspective of each site, given a sequence of incoming operations,
it is fundamental to know which of these require distributed coordination (in red) and which may be executed locally first and
subsequently propagated to the remainder sites (in green). The first
operation, acc1.deposit(100), does not require coordination and,
hence, executes locally first. Next, acc2.transfer(acc3,100), in
red, is placed under coordination to guarantee its execution over
the same state at every site. It is followed by acc2.deposit(30),
which does not require coordination but cannot execute immediately because it may interfere with the transfer under coordination,
causing the latter to execute over different states in different sites.
∗ Work partially supported by the Portuguese Fundacão para a Ciência e Tecnologia via

project DeDuCe (PTDC/ CCI-COM/32166/2017) and NOVA LINCS (UIDB/04516/2020).
We thank Rúben Vaz for his contribution on the Java prototype implementation (§ 5)
used to apply Ant to common use-cases. This document is the companion technical
report of paper [15].
1 In the example the three account are: “acc1”, “acc2” and “acc3”.

It is thus queued, waiting for the former to conclude. This restriction does not, however, apply to acc3.deposit(20), since it does
not interfere with the execution of both acc2.deposit(30) and
acc2.transfer(acc3,100). So, it may execute locally first, ahead
of operations received before and concurrently with the ones in execution (regardless of the coordination involved), what we refer to
as call anticipation. Finally, we have operation getBalance() that
returns a weakly consistent view of an account’s balance. Although
operating over account acc2, the operation does not conflict with
acc2.deposit(30) nor with acc2.transfer(acc3,100) and,
hence, may execute locally first.
The state-of-the-art proposals on mixed consistency address
the computation of the coordination level required by each operation executing over a distributed datastore, in order to guarantee the data’s consistency requirements. Works such as [5, 6, 18]
provided frameworks to identify which operations may execute
without coordination. Subsequently, others have focused on providing specifications that enable the automatic inference of the
necessary coordination, by requiring reasoning about the side effects of each operation [13], and/or the visibility of data and how
all these interfere with each other [18, 21].
Regarding the analysis of which operations may run concurrently, that gives rise to call anticipation, the state-of-the-art [7, 16,
18] is to conduct a static commutativity analysis that produces a conflict table indicating if two operations may conflict, or not, instead
of synthesizing the conditions when they conflict (or commute),
unlike what is currently done in other contexts [2]. Furthermore,
the analyses work on semantic representations of the applications
(either logical or flow-based models), not on actual code implementing the applications. They are language agnostic, but for evaluation
purposes implement the approach in a particular setting.
In this paper we propose a language-based call anticipation static
analysis named Ant. Rather than providing a generic semantic
model, agnostic to the language in which the code is written (and
sometimes even abstract on the way the model is built), we define
our analysis directly on the code, with a language-based algorithm
relying instead on formal definitions of program semantics. This
analysis is able to produce a conflict table that, for each pair of
method calls, defines a system of inequalities that must be satisfied
at runtime in order to anticipate a call.
We define our analysis over a augmented version of the OOlong [4] core language, with constructs to (1) identify which fields
are replicated, and of these, which allow for weak consistency, (2)
the specification of invariants over the replicated fields, and (3) the
definition of guards for method executions. The language shares
similarities with MixT [19] or DCCT [22] but distinguishes itself by

under coordination
Site

Site

under coordination
acc2.transfer(acc3, 100)

Site

Local
execution
acc1.deposit(100)
acc2.transfer(acc3, 100)
incoming acc2.transfer(acc3, 100) incoming acc2.deposit(30)
acc2.deposit(30)
acc3.deposit(20)
acc3.deposit(20)
acc2.getBalance()
acc2.getBalance()

under coordination
acc2.transfer(acc3, 100)
acc2.deposit(30)

acc2.deposit(30)
incoming acc3.deposit(20)
acc2.getBalance()

under coordination
acc2.transfer(acc3, 100)

Site
Local
execution

Site

acc2.deposit(30)

under coordination
acc2.transfer(acc3, 100)
acc2.deposit(30)

Local
execution
incoming

incoming

acc2.getBalance()

acc3.deposit(20)
acc2.getBalance()

Figure 1: Bank accounts replicated among several sites. Calls that require coordination in red, the remainder are marked green.
Table 1: Syntax of Ant-OOlong programs. Ids, Cds, Fds, Mds
and Msigs are sequences of zero or more of their singular
counterparts. Terms in grey background are only available
at runtime.

Table 2: Closure of preconditions closure𝐻,𝑉 ( ˜𝑐) = 𝑐˜
𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝑣
closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝑣

𝑃
Id

::=
::=

Cd
Msig
𝑑
𝑐
Md
Fd
𝑒

::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=

𝑣
𝑠𝑣
𝑡
Γ
cfg

::=
::=
::=
::=
::=

Ids Cds 𝑒
(Programs)
interface 𝐼 {Msigs} |
interface 𝐼 extends 𝐼 1, 𝐼 2
(Interfaces)
class 𝐶 implements 𝐼 {Fds Mds}
(Classes)
𝑚(𝑥 : 𝑡 1 ) : 𝑡 2 [ ˜𝑐]
(Signatures)
𝑥 | 𝑥 .𝑓 | 𝑣
(Invariant values)
𝑑 1 Rel 𝑑 2
(Invariants)
Msig{𝑒}
(Methods)
𝑓 : 𝑡 ∼weak [ ˜𝑐]
(Fields)
𝑠𝑣 | 𝑥 .𝑓 | 𝑥 .𝑓 = 𝑒 | 𝑥 .𝑚(𝑒) |
let 𝑥 = 𝑒 1 in 𝑒 2 | new 𝐶 | (𝑡) 𝑒
(Expressions)
null | 𝑛 ∈ int | 𝜄
(Values)
𝑣 | 𝑥 | 𝑠𝑣 1 Op 𝑠𝑣 2
(Symbolic Values)
𝐼 | 𝐶 | Unit | int
(Types)
(Typing Environment)
𝜖 | Γ, 𝑥 : 𝑡 | Γ, 𝜄 : 𝐶
⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑆𝑇 ⟩
(Configuration)

𝐻
𝑉
sf

::=
::=
::=

𝜖 | 𝐻, 𝜄 ↦→ obj
𝜖 | 𝑉 , 𝑥 ↦→ 𝑣
𝜖 | sf , (𝜄, 𝑓 , r) | sf , (𝜄, 𝑓 , w)

𝑆𝑇
obj

::=
::=

𝑒 | EXN
(𝐶, 𝐹 )

𝐹

::=

𝜖 | 𝐹, 𝑓 ↦→ 𝑣

(Heap)
(Stack)
(Strong fields)
(Single Threads)
(Objects)
(Field map)

not requiring the programmer to reason about consistency levels.
Instead they must just classify fields as weak or strong (by default).
In short, our main contributions are the following: (1) A formal
semantics of the state conditions under which we can anticipate
a method call executed in a distributed runtime system featuring
replicas (§ 3); (2) A static analysis of object-oriented methods that
builds on side effects and on their symbolic semantics to identify a
system of inequalities over objects’ fields and methods’ parameters
that must be satisfied at runtime in order to anticipate a call (§ 4).
THE LANGUAGE

The object-oriented language under consideration, dubbed AntOOlong, is meant to model replicated systems where object fields
are strongly consistent, unless explicitly marked as weakly consistent. We present in Table 1 the syntax of Ant-OOlong.

𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝜄

𝐻 (𝜄) = (𝐶, 𝐹 )

𝐹 (𝑓 ) = 𝑣

closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑥 .𝑓 ) = 𝑣
closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑣) = 𝑣
closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑑 1 ) = 𝑣 1

closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑑 2 ) = 𝑣 2

closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑑 1 Rel 𝑑 2 ) = 𝑣 1 Rel 𝑣 2
closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑐 1 ) = 𝑐 1′ · · · closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑐𝑛 ) = 𝑐𝑛′
closure𝐻,𝑉 (𝑐 1, . . . , 𝑐𝑛 ) = 𝑐 1′ , . . . , 𝑐𝑛′

Syntax. So, a field declaration, by default strongly consistent,
can be optionally flagged with the weak keyword to indicate that
the field has weak consistency. Field and method declarations are
decorated with a (possibly empty) set of invariants 𝑐, where in the
latter case 𝑐 is often referred to as a precondition; an invariant is
an application of a binary predicate Rel over integers. Invariants
are used solely for program analysis purposes (the call anticipation analysis of § 3 and § 4), and have no impact on the dynamic
semantics.
A value 𝑣 can be a null reference, an integer 𝑛 or a location 𝜄. A
novelty is the presence of symbolic values 𝑠𝑣 that include values,
variables 𝑥 and applications of integers operators Op to symbolic
values. As usual, occurrences of a variable 𝑥 are bound in an expression 𝑒 2 in the context of a let-expression let 𝑥 = 𝑒 1 in 𝑒 2 . Occurrences
of other variables in 𝑒 2 , or in general in an expression not inside a
let are free.
Semantics. The evaluation relation, noted cfg ↩→ cfg ′ , recast the
single-thread semantics of OOlong, modulo the presence of integer
operations. The rules are in defined in Table ??. We omit the rules
for exceptions, which are those defined in [4]. A configuration cfg
is pair ⟨Σ, 𝑒⟩ where Σ is the state and 𝑒 is an expression. A state
contains a heap 𝐻 mapping locations to objects, a stack 𝑉 mapping
variables to values, and two extra-fields to monitor the method calls’
preconditions and the access to strong fields, respectively.
The first extra-field monitors if an execution respected the method’s
preconditions: e.g. if a method 𝑚 of class 𝐶 has the pre-condition
this.𝑓 ≥ 1, where 𝑓 is an integer field of 𝐶, and 𝑚 is executed, then

Figure 2: Semantics of Ant-OOlong programs cfg ↩→ cfg ′
𝐸 [•]

::=

𝑥 .𝑓 = • | 𝑥 .𝑚(•) | • Op 𝑠𝑣 | 𝑠𝑣 Op • | let 𝑥 = • in 𝑒 | (𝑡) •

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑒⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻 ′, 𝑉 ′, sf ′, 𝑐˜ ′, 𝑒 ′ ⟩
dynEvalCxt

dynEvalOp

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝐸 [𝑒]⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻 ′, 𝑉 ′, sf ′, 𝑐˜ ′, 𝐸 [𝑒 ′ ]

𝑛 = 𝑛 1 Op 𝑛 2
⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑛 1 Op 𝑛 2 ⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑛⟩
𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝜄
𝐹 (𝑓 ) = 𝑣

𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝑣
dynEvalVar

dynEvalSelect

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑥⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑣⟩

𝐻 (𝜄) = (𝐶, 𝐹 )
sf ′ = sf , (𝜄, 𝑓 , r)

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑥 .𝑓 ⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻 ′, 𝑉 , sf ′, ˜𝑐, 𝑣⟩

𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝜄
𝐻 (𝜄) = (𝐶, 𝐹 )
𝐻 ′ = 𝐻 [𝜄 ↦→ (𝐶, 𝐹 [𝑓 ↦→ 𝑣])]
sf ′ = sf , (𝜄, 𝑓 , w)
dynEvalUpdate

dynEvalNew

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑥 .𝑓 = 𝑣⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻 ′, 𝑉 , sf ′, ˜𝑐, null⟩

fields(𝐶) = 𝑓1 : 𝑡 1 ∼weak [𝑐˜1 ], . . . , 𝑓𝑛 : 𝑡𝑛 ∼weak [𝑐˜𝑛 ]
𝐹 = 𝑓1 ↦→ init(𝑡 1 ), . . . , 𝑓𝑛 ↦→ init(𝑡𝑛 )
𝜄 fresh

dynEvalLet

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, new 𝐶⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻 [𝜄 ↦→ (𝐶, 𝐹 )], 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝜄⟩

𝑥 ′ fresh

𝑉 ′ = 𝑉 [𝑥 ′ ↦→ 𝑣]

𝑒 ′ = 𝑒 [𝑥 ↦→ 𝑥 ′ ]

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, let 𝑥 = 𝑣 in e⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻, 𝑉 ′, sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑒 ′ ⟩

𝐻 (𝜄) = (𝐶, 𝐹 )
𝑚(𝑦 : 𝑠) : 𝑡 ′ [𝑐˜ ′ ]{𝑒} ∈ methods(𝐶)
𝑥 ∉ 𝑏𝑣 (𝑒)
𝑦 ′ fresh
′
′
′
𝑉 = 𝑉 [𝑦 ↦→ 𝑣]
𝑒 = 𝑒 [this ↦→ 𝑥] [𝑦 ↦→ 𝑦 ′ ]

𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝜄
dynEvalCast

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, (𝑡)𝑣⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑣⟩

dynEvalCall

the first extra-field contains the entry 𝑛 ≥ 1, where 𝑛 is the value of
this.𝑓 at execution time; by evaluating 𝑛 ≥ 1 after the call’s execution, we are able to infer if the call was legit. The second extra-field
contains entries of the form (𝜄, 𝑓 , r) and (𝜄, 𝑓 , w) indicating that the
strong field 𝑓 of the object in location 𝜄 has been accessed during
the execution in read and write mode, respectively.
An object is a pair (𝐶, 𝐹 ), where 𝐶 is a class identifier and 𝐹 is a
map from fields to values.
Type System. The typing rules for expressions are those of [4]
extended with the rules for integers. The rules inductively define
the typing relation Γ ⊢ 𝑒 : 𝑡. The typing rules for fields and methods
enforce that an invariant 𝑐 of a field 𝑓 cannot refer to fields different
from 𝑓 , and a precondition 𝑐 of a method cannot refer to weak fields,
respectively. The typing rules for configurations, noted as Γ ⊢ cfg : 𝑡,
extend straightforwardly [4] by adding the rules for the monitoring
fields.
All typing rules are available in § A.
Programming Example. Listing 1 shows how to program in AntOOlong an account whose balance is replicated but does not require
strong consistency. Importantly, as intended, the code is identical to
a non-replicated implementation. The weak field balance cannot
be mentioned in the methods’ preconditions; on contrast, the strong
field min_cash can be accessed in method init to verify that the
initial amount is greater or equal to the minimum allowed. The state
invariant is the invariant of fields balance and min_cash. Methods that do not change the state invariant are locally permissible
(cf. getBalance), while a method 𝑚 that may change the state invariant is locally permissible in a pre-state satisfying its invariants
if and only if all calls of 𝑚 satisfying the preconditions spawned
from the call lead to post-states that satisfy their invariants; for

⟨𝐻, 𝑉 , sf , ˜𝑐, 𝑥 .𝑚(𝑣)⟩ ↩→ ⟨𝐻, 𝑉 ′, sf , ( ˜𝑐, closure𝐻, [𝑦↦→𝑣 ] (𝑐˜ ′ )), 𝑒 ′ ⟩

Listing 1: Bank account
class Account implements Object {
balance : int weak [ this . balance ≥ 0]
min_cash : int [ this . min_cash ≥ 50]
def init ( amount : int ) : Unit [ amount ≥ this . min_cash ]{
this . balance = amount

}

def withdraw ( amount : int ) : Unit [ amount > 0] {
this . balance -= amount

}

def transfer ( recv : Transfer ) : Unit {
let a = recv . amount in let w = recv . account in
this . withdraw (a ); w. deposit (a)
}
def deposit ( amount : int ) : Unit [ amount > 0] {
this . balance += amount

}

def accrueInterest ( interest : int ) : Unit {
let x = this . balance * interest / 100 in
this . balance += x
}
def getBalance () : int

{ this . balance }

}

instance, a call transfer(𝑛) spawns the precondition 𝑛 > 0. Therefore, methods init and deposit are locally permissible, since the
amount to be initialized or deposited, respectively, must be positive,
while withdraw, transfer and accrueInterest are not locally
permissible.
Method Call Execution. Ant method calls execute as indivisible
units over the target data. § 7 will elaborate on the consistency level
assigned to the execution of each method call.int For now, to make
the presentation of the following sections clearer, we simply state
that method calls that either access strong fields or are not locally

permissible require strong consistency semantics. The remainder
may execute under causal or even eventual consistency, depend- 1
ing on whether causality relations have been identified between 23
methods or not.
3

METHOD CALL ANTICIPATION

This section introduces the runtime notion of method call anticipation, which defines, given a sequence of method calls executed
in a distributed runtime system featuring replicas, the state conditions under which one of the calls can be safely anticipated in the
sequence, without leading to possible inconsistent state in different
replicas executing that same sequence. To this aim, taking inspiration from Hamsaz [16], we recast the notion of local permissible
methods and of commutative method calls in Ant, and we equip
them with a formal semantics with respect to our language.
7
9
11
13
15

Key notions. Before defining call anticipation, we present the
main concepts we build on. In the remainder, we use mc to range
over expressions 𝑥 .𝑚(𝑠𝑣), and consider configurations ⟨Σ, mc⟩, where
we assume that there exists Γ and 𝑡 s.t. Γ ⊢ ⟨Σ, mc⟩ : 𝑡. Whenever
there are a state Σ ′ and a value 𝑣 s.t. ⟨Σ, mc⟩ ↩→∗ ⟨Σ ′, 𝑣⟩, we let
update(mc, Σ) = Σ ′ . We denote single substitutions with ↦→, and,
given an invariant value 𝑑 and a state Σ, let the substitution 𝑑Σ be
equal to 𝑣 when 𝑑 = 𝑥 and 𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝑣, or 𝑑 = 𝑥 .𝑓 and 𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝜄 and
𝐻 (𝜄) = (𝐶, 𝐹 ) and 𝐹 (𝑓 ) = 𝑣, and be equal to 𝑑 otherwise, where 𝐻
and 𝑉 are the heap and the stack of Σ, respectively.
Satisfied Invariant An invariant 𝑑 1 Rel 𝑑 2 is satisfied by a state Σ,
noted Σ ⊪ 𝑑 1 Rel 𝑑 2 , whenever 𝑑 1 Σ Rel 𝑑 2 Σ = true.
State Invariant Let 𝐻 and 𝑉 be the heap and the stack of a state
Σ, respectively. The invariant predicate I(Σ) holds whenever
𝑉 (𝑥) = 𝜄 and 𝐻 (𝜄) = (𝐶, 𝐹 ) and 𝑓 : 𝑡 ∼ weak [ ˜𝑐] is a field
declaration of class 𝐶 and 𝑐 ∈ 𝑐˜ imply Σ ⊪ 𝑐 [this ↦→ 𝑥].
Call Guard Let Σ be a state with empty monitored preconditions,
and assume update(mc, Σ) = Σ ′ . A call mc is Σ-guarded
when 𝑐 is a monitored precondition of Σ ′ implies Σ ′ ⊪ 𝑐.
We are interested in analyzing the permissibility of a guarded
call in a given pre-state, that is when the post-state spawned by the
call preserves the invariant of the pre-state. Local permissibility of
a method requires that all its guarded calls are permissible.
Permissible and Not-Permissible Calls Let mc be a Σ-guarded
method call. We say that mc is permissible in Σ, written as
P(Σ, mc), if I(Σ) implies I(update(mc, Σ)); and we say that
mc is not permissible in Σ, written as NP(Σ, mc), if I(Σ) implies ¬I(update(mc, Σ));
Locally Permissible A method 𝑚 is locally permissible in a state
Σ, written as LP(Σ, 𝑚), if and only if,
all Σ-guarded calls of 𝑚 are permissible in Σ.
State-commutativity and State-conflict are symmetric binary
relations over method calls indexed by states. Rather than requiring,
as in [16], that commuting method calls enforce this behaviour in
all possible states, we tailor our analysis and definition to the state
under consideration.
State-Commutativity and State-Conflict Let Σ be a state. Two
method calls mc and mc ′ Σ-commute if and only if
update(𝑚𝑐 ′, update(𝑚𝑐, Σ)) = update(𝑚𝑐, update(𝑚𝑐 ′, Σ))
Otherwise, they Σ-conflict.

Table 3: Call Anticipation Algorithm
let anticipation ( Sigma : state ) ( mc1 mc2 : call ) : bool =
if commute Sigma mc1 mc2 then
let m1 = methodOf mc1 in let m2 = methodOf mc2 in
match LP Sigma m2 || forall n1 ,... , nm . P ( WIFG Sigma ( n1 ,... , nm )) mc2 with
| true ->
forall n1 ,... , nm .
let pre = wifg Sigma ( n1 ,... , nm ) in
let post = update mc2 pre in
( match LP post m1 with
| true -> LP post m1
| false -> ( if P pre mc1 then P post mc1 ) &&
if NP pre mc1 then NP post mc1 ) &&
strong_fields_non_interference Sigma mc1 mc2
| false -> false
else false

We are now ready to introduce the (as far as we know, original)
notion of call anticipation, stating:
when can a sequence of two method calls mc; mc ′ be reordered into
mc ′ ; mc, thus anticipating the call mc ′ .
To this aim, we rely on (1) quantification over integers instantiating the weak consistency fields, and (2) the fields that must
preserve strong consistency within a method call mc. Quantification is needed since, in our analysis, we cannot trust the actual
value of fields with weak consistency, because they could be outdated. The weak integer fields’ generalization of a state Σ w.r.t. a
tuple of integers 𝑁 = 𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑚 , noted wifg(Σ, 𝑁 ), is obtained by
substituting the values in the field map of the objects in the heap,
such that the field is an integer tagged with weak with the integers
in 𝑁 , where we assume that the are 𝑚 such values.
The anticipation algorithm. is presented in Listing 3: given a
state Σ and a sequence mc 1 ; mc 2 , it says when we are allowed to
anticipate the call mc 2 w.r.t. mc 1 .
The algorithm requires that the two calls are commutative (l2);
subsequently, we have the following steps:
(1) check whether the call mc 2 is locally permissible in the prestate Σ or if the call is permissible for all possible values of
the weak integer fields of Σ (l4);
(2) check whether for all possible values 𝑛 1, ..., 𝑛𝑚 of the weak
integer fields of Σ, the call mc 1 is locally permissible in the
post-state, that is the update of wifg(Σ, (𝑛 1, ..., 𝑛𝑚 )) with
mc 2 (l6–9);
(a) if not, check whether the permissibility of mc 1 has not
changed in the pre and in the post states:
• if mc 1 was permissible in the pre-state, it must be permissible in the post-state (l11)
• if mc 1 was not permissible in the pre-state, it must be
non-permissible in the post-state (l12);
(3) check whether the value of strong fields accessed in read
mode in the execution of ⟨update(mc 1, Σ), mc 2 ⟩ are not accessed in write mode during the execution of ⟨Σ, mc 1 ⟩ (l13).
To see why the double implication is necessary in 2(a), consider the case where there are two replicas and a sequence of calls
mc 1 ; mc 2 , and where 𝑚𝑐 1 is both non-permissibile in the first replica
and permissible in the second replica, because the two replicas are
accessing weak fields with different values. The anticipation of mc 2
should preserve this invariant: that is, after the anticipation of mc 2 ,
the call mc 1 should still be non-permissibile in the first replica and
non-permissible in the second replica, otherwise the two replicas
would diverge after performing the call anticipation.

We stress that both checks 1) and 2) must be effectuated irrespectively of the actual values of the weak (integer) fields in the
heap, hence the usage of universal quantification.
Limitations. The main obstacle to use the algorithm at runtime
is the overhead: the use of quantification would require the help
of a constraint solver, which in most cases would make unfeasible
to obtain an answer in a reasonable time. This motivates the need
of the static analysis introduced in § 4: it returns a system of inequalities over integer fields and method’s parameters that can be
efficiently checked at runtime in order to decide anticipation.
Example 3.1. Consider the methods defined in Listing 1, the
sequence 𝑥 .withdraw(5); 𝑥 .deposit(10), and a state Σ where the
heap contains, for some integer 𝑛 ′ ≥ 0, the entry
𝑥 ↦→ (𝐴, 𝐹 [balance ↦→ 𝑛 ′ ] [min_cash ↦→ 50])
We apply the algorithm steps to decide if we can obtain the sequence 𝑥 .deposit(10); 𝑥 .withdraw(5). The methods commute, as
the operations + and − do. Deposit is LP, therefore step (1) is
fulfilled. In step (2), wifg(Σ, 𝑛) contains a heap with an entry
𝑥 ↦→ (𝐴, 𝐹 [balance ↦→ 𝑛] [min_cash ↦→ 50]) (the weak value
𝑛 ′ has been substituted with an arbitrary 𝑛). Thus, withdraw is not
LP in this state, since a call 𝑥 .withdraw(𝑎) with 𝑛 < 𝑎 would not
be permissible, as it would break the post-state invariant.
The next step is the analysis of sub-case (2.a): we need to establish
that if the call 𝑥 .withdraw(5) is (not-)permissibile in the pre-state,
then it is (not-)permissible in the post-state, respectively. This does
not hold: e.g. when 𝑛 < 5, we have that 𝑥 .withdraw(5) is not
permissible, while it is permissible in the post-state, since 𝑛 ≥ 0
implies 5 < 𝑛 + 10, and in turn the post-state satisfies its invariant.
The algorithm therefore returns false.
STATIC SEMANTICS OF ANTICIPATION

In this section, we present a source-level analysis of Ant programs.
The aim is the automatic generation of the conditions under which,
given a sequence of method calls mc 1 ; mc 2 executed in a distributed
runtime system featuring replicas, we can anticipate the call mc 2
w.r.t. mc 1 , leading to the sequence mc 2 ; mc 1 . The conditions are
expressed in terms of a system of inequalities populated by aliases
of the integer fields, and of the actual (integer) parameters.
The analysis has three levels – we identify:
(1) the conditions under which pairs of methods can give rise
to commutative calls;
(2) locally permissible methods that do not need any coordination at runtime;
(3) and, when a method is not LP, the conditions under which
its call can be anticipated.

Effect Inference
The core of the source-level analysis of Ant programs is the effects
of methods. An effect list provides a representation of a program
that is executed in a memory-based model. We refer to it as symbolic to distinguish from the actual semantics of OOlong. As in the
standard semantics, there is an operation to change the fields of
objects, operations to introduce bindings, etc. The aim is to track
the side effects of a method executed abstractly in a state where

Table 4: Effects of typed methods

𝑥𝑏
𝑏

::=
::=

Syntax of effects
VbindL (𝑥) | VbindC (𝑥, ˜
𝑐) | Vfield (𝑥, 𝑓 )
Evar (𝑥𝑏 ) | Eop (𝑂𝑝, 𝑒) | Eret (𝑒) | Enew (𝐶, Fds)

E

::=
::=

[] | 𝑏 :: 𝐸
( ˜𝑐, 𝐸)

eff

Static inference rules for expressions and methods.

eOp
eNew

eCall
eUpdate
eLet

(Effect Variables)
(Effect Expressions)
(Effect Expression Lists)
(Effect)

Γ ⊢𝑒 ⊲𝐸

Γ ⊢𝑥 Md ⊲ eff

Γ ⊢ 𝑠𝑣1 ⊲ 𝐸 1
Γ ⊢ 𝑠𝑣1 Op 𝑠𝑣2 ⊲ 𝐸 1 ◦ [ Eop (𝑂𝑝, 𝑠𝑣2 ) ]

Γ ⊢ new 𝐶 ⊲ [Enew (𝐶, fields (𝐶 ) ) ]

Γ ⊢ 𝑠𝑣 ⊲ 𝐸 1 Γ (𝑥 ) = 𝐶 𝑚 (𝑦 : 𝑠 ) : 𝑡 ′ [𝑐˜ ]{𝑒 } ∈ methods (𝐶 )
𝑥 ∉ bv(𝑒 ) Γ, 𝑦′ : 𝑠 ⊢ 𝑒 [this ↦→ 𝑥 ] [𝑦 ↦→ 𝑦′ ] ⊲ 𝐸 2 𝑦′ fresh
Γ ⊢ 𝑥 .𝑚 (𝑠𝑣) ⊲ 𝐸 1 ◦ Evar ( VbindC (𝑦′ , 𝑐 [this ↦→ 𝑥 ] [𝑦 ↦→ 𝑦′ ]) ) :: 𝐸 2

Γ ⊢ 𝑠𝑣 ⊲ 𝐸 1
Γ ⊢ 𝑥 .𝑓 = 𝑠𝑣 ⊲ 𝐸 1 ◦ [ Evar ( Vfield (𝑥, 𝑓 ) ) ]

eCast

Γ ⊢ 𝑒1 : 𝑡
Γ, 𝑥 ′ : 𝑡 ⊢ 𝑒 2 [𝑥 ↦→ 𝑥 ′ ] ⊲ 𝐸 2
Γ ⊢ let 𝑥 = 𝑒 1 in 𝑒 2 ⊲ 𝐸 1 ◦ Evar ( VbindL (𝑥 ′ ) :: 𝐸 2

Γ ⊢ 𝑒1 ⊲ 𝐸1

eExpr
eMethod

Γ ⊢𝑒: ⊲𝐸
Γ ⊢ (𝑡 )𝑒 ⊲ 𝐸
𝑥 ′ fresh

𝑒 = 𝑥 or 𝑒 = 𝑣 or 𝑒 = 𝑥 .𝑓
Γ ⊢ 𝑒 ⊲ [Eret (𝑒 ) ]

Md = 𝑚 (𝑥 : 𝑡 1 ) : 𝑡 2 [𝑐˜ ]{𝑒 }

Γ, 𝑥 : 𝑡 1 ⊢ 𝑒 ⊲ 𝐸

Γ ⊢ Md ⊲ ( ˜
𝑐, 𝐸)

the heap contains symbolic instances of this and of the formal parameter, dubbed other, such that their integer fields are aliased by
uninstantiated variables. Interestingly, effects have a flat structure,
that is, lists of effects are symbolically executed in a non-inductive
deterministic framework that relies on a single memory cell for the
return value, thus providing the ground for efficient implementations.
The syntax of effects and their inference rules are in Table 4; the
top-level rule for methods, noted Γ ⊢ Md ⊲ eff , assumes that Md
belongs to a type-checked program 𝑃 [4]: in such case, we say that
the method Md has effect eff . In the rules for expressions, where
we use ◦ for list concatenation, we consider four side effects, or
effect expressions:
• Evar, the effect of a let-expression, of a method call, or of
an update;
• Eop, the effect of an integer operation;
• Enew, the effect of a new;
• Eret, the return-only effect of the remaining expressions.
The parameter of Evar is an effect variable: the effect variables
for let-expressions and calls receive as parameter a variable 𝑥 that is
freshly added by the inference system in order to substitute the occurrences of the let-variable and of the method’s formal parameter,
respectively (cf. eLet and eCall). Given the class of the instance,
in eCall the effect of the call is calculated by substituting both the
occurrence of this in the body with the caller 𝑥, where we assume
that 𝑥 is not bound in the body (eventually by alpha-renaming), and
the occurrence of the formal parameter with the fresh variable 𝑦.
Notably, the effect variable VbindC(𝑦, ˜𝑐) of a method call also carries the method’s preconditions 𝑐˜ opportunely instantiated with the
actual caller and the fresh variable instantiating the formal parameter: this allows to track the chain of preconditions originating from
nested method calls, and the actual parameters of the preconditions.
The effect variable for an update provides the variable and the field
(cf. eUpdate); the symbolic value 𝑠𝑣 to be assigned to the field is

the result of the symbolic evaluation of the last entry on the left
in the returned effect list, that is the tail of 𝐸 1 . For instance, when
𝑠𝑣 = 𝑠𝑣 1 Op 𝑠𝑣 2 , this would be the tail [Eop(𝑂𝑝, 𝑠𝑣 2 )], symbolically
evaluated after the evaluation of the effect of 𝑠𝑣 1 (cf. eOp). This is
the general mechanism to pass values among effects: each effect 𝑏
in 𝐸 ◦ 𝑏 :: 𝐸 ′ “receives” the result of the evaluation of the tail of 𝐸.
Symbolic Semantics. Recall2 that a configuration is a pair with a
state and an expression, being the state a fourtuple (heap, stack, a
field to monitor method calls’ pre-conditions and another to record
access to strong fields). Symbolic configurations 𝑒cfg are composed
by: a symbolic heap, containing objects that have symbolic values
in their field map; a symbolic stack, mapping variables to symbolic
values; a field to monitor the access to strong fields (as in standard
configurations); an effect; and a symbolic value, also called buffer,
returned by the last effect expression evaluated in the effect list.
Intuitively, the semantics of an effect eff is based on evaluating
it in a symbolic configuration, a relation noted 𝑒cfg → 𝑒cfg ′ . The
interested reader will find the evaluation rules in § B. By executing
the effect of a method definition in a symbolic state and consuming
all entries of the effect list, we obtain a state’s heap containing the
manipulations done by the method’s body to the objects in the heap
(which may grow due to new expressions, cf. eNew). Moreover, in
order to describe the behaviour of all guarded calls of the method,
we require that the final preconditions are SAT.
For a symbolic configuration 𝑒cfg, let updates (𝑒cfg) = 𝑒cfg ′
whenever 𝑒cfg →∗ 𝑒cfg ′ , and 𝑒cfg ′ contains the effect (𝑐˜ ′, []),
and 𝑐˜ ′ is SAT. Given the invariants 𝑐˜ and a symbolic state 𝑒Σ,
let the (𝑒Σ-)closure of 𝑐˜ = 𝑐 1, . . . , 𝑐𝑛 , noted ˜𝑐𝑒Σ, be the invariants
𝑐 1𝑒Σ, · · · , 𝑐𝑛 𝑒Σ, where each 𝑐𝑖 𝑒Σ is obtained by substituting the
fields in 𝑐𝑖 with the values in 𝑒Σ (cf. § 3), 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛.
Example 4.1. To illustrate the symbolic evaluation of effects, we
symbolically execute method init in Figure 1.
Let 𝑎, 𝑏 and 𝑚 abbreviate amount, balance and min_cash, respectively. The effect of the body is eff = ((𝑎 ≥ 0, 𝑎 ≤ this.𝑚), 𝐸),
where 𝐸 = Eret(𝑎) :: Evar(Vfield(this, 𝑏)].
Consider the heap [this ↦→ (𝐴, [𝑏 ↦→ 𝑧] [𝑚 ↦→ 𝑦])]. To complete
the configuration, noted 𝑒cfg, we add an empty stack, empty monitored strong fields, the effect obtained by closing the precondition,
and the buffer null; the closure is (𝑎 ≥ 0, 𝑎 ≤ 𝑦).
Given a variable 𝑥, we say that the reduction system locates 𝑥
whenever it finds 𝑥 in the domain of the stack, or in the domain of
the heap.
The first reduction step takes the head of the effect list, produces
a configuration containing the precondition and the effect’s tail,
fails to locate 𝑎, and in turn sets the buffer to 𝑎 (where if e.g. we
had 𝑒𝑉 (𝑎) = 𝑠𝑣, the buffer would have been set to 𝑠𝑣).
The second step produces the precondition and an empty effect
list, locate this, produces the heap [this ↦→ (𝐴, [𝑏 ↦→ 𝑎] [𝑚 ↦→ 𝑦])],
and sets the buffer to null, thus producing a configuration 𝑒cfg ′ .
Now the computation ends, as the effect list is empty. Note that
since the reached precondition (𝑎 ≥ 0, 𝑎 ≤ 𝑦) is SAT, the heap of
the redex contains the legit modifications done by all guarded calls
of init: updates (𝑒cfg) = 𝑒cfg ′ . This would not have been the case
2 Definition in the paragraph on the Dynamic Semantics in § 2.

if, for instance, the body of init was this.deposit(−10), which
would have spawn (𝑎 ≥ 0, 𝑎 ≤ 𝑦, −10 ≥ 0) as final precondition.

Effect-based anticipation analysis
The static analysis presented in this section relies on the symbolic
representation of objects: given a class, we generate an instance
by generalizing all integer fields with symbolic variables, and by
instantiating all object fields with generated instances of their class.
Given a set of classes, we generate a symbolic state, noted 𝑒Σ,
by generating a symbolic heap containing symbolic objects, by
adding an empty stack, and by adding empty monitored strong
fields. In order to generate the heap for the analysis, we thus need
to determine the set of classes under consideration, and the aliases
to objects. Given two methods definitions Md 1, Md 2 whose method
calls are executed in sequence, the classes involved are those of
this1 and this2 , and those of other1 and other2 iff each other𝑖
is an object, 𝑖 = 1, 2; each class could recursively spawn further
instances by having object fields. In order to generate the aliases,
we need to control interference among the two calls of the methods.
To this aim, we analyze all possible equalities among the locations
of the objects instantiating this1 , this2 , other1 , and other2 , noted
𝑥 1  𝑥 2 . In general, there are fifteen possible equalities cases, e.g.
1) this1  this2 and this2  other1 and other1  other2 , or
6) this1  this2 and other1  other2 , or 12) this1  other2 ,
and so on. In particular, e.g. when the type of both the first and
the second method’s parameter is not a class, we have at least two
cases: this1  this2 or this1 ̸  this2 . We indicate the equality case
under analysis with h, and write gen(h, Md 1, Md 2 ) to indicate the
symbolic state induced by the generated symbolic heap containing
the entries projected by h: e.g., in case 1) above the heap must
contain an object entry aliased by this𝑖 , other𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1, 2; in case
6) it must contain an entry aliased by this𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1, 2 and another
different entry aliased by other𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1, 2; in case 12) it must contain
an entry aliased by this1, other2 , a different entry for this2 , and,
if other1 is an object, a different entry for other1 .
Symbolic Method Sequence. Consider: (i) an equality case h; (ii)
method definitions Md 1 and Md 2 such that, for each 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2},
this𝑖 : 𝐶𝑖 ⊢ Md𝑖 ⊲ (𝑐˜𝑖 , 𝐸𝑖 ); (iii) 𝑒Σ = gen(h, Md 1, Md 2 ); (iv)) 𝑒cfg =
⟨𝑒Σ, (𝑐˜1𝑒Σ, 𝐸 1 ), null⟩.
Assume updates (𝑒cfg) = 𝑒cfg ′ , where 𝑒cfg ′ contains state 𝑒Σ ′
and effect (𝑐˜ ′, []).
Furthermore, consider the configuration 𝑒cfg 2 obtained from
𝑒cfg ′ by: (i) substituting the stack with an empty stack, the effect
with (𝑐˜2𝑒Σ ′, 𝐸 2 ), and the buffer with null; and (ii) by adding a
separator to the monitored strong fields.
Finally, assume that updates (𝑒cfg 2 ) = 𝑒cfg ′′ and that 𝑒cfg ′′
contains heap 𝑒𝐻 , monitored strong fields sf , and effect (𝑐˜ ′′, []).
We can now define the notion symbolic method sequence:
h

Md 1 ; Md 2 −→ 𝑒𝐻, sf , (𝑐˜ ′, 𝑐˜ ′′ )
Symbolic commutativity and local permissibility. The static notion of commutative method sequence is parametrized by a set
of equations over symbolic values: the equations are the result of
comparing the symbolic heaps obtained by symbolically executing
a sequence of two methods, and its inverse. Commutativity says
under which conditions the two methods commute, that is it holds

Table 5: Method Anticipation Algorithm
2
4
6
8
10

let ant ( h : eqCase ) ( c1 c2 : classDef ) ( md1 md2 : methodDef ) : prop list =
let eSigma = gen h md1 md2 in
let eqs , cc = scommute h md1 md2 in
let eff2 = hasEffect c2 md2 in
let < eSigma ' ' ,_ ,_ > = update_s eSigma eff2 null in
eqs :: cc :: sLP eSigma md2 ::
sLP eSigma ' ' md1 \/
forall x in ( weak_inv eSigma ) .
(( sP eSigma md1 = > sP eSigma ' ' md1 ) /\
( sNP eSigma md1 = > sNP eSigma ' ' md1 ) ) :: [ SFNI h md1 md2 ]

when there exists a set of equations 𝑒𝑞𝑠 that equate the symbolic
heaps 𝑒𝐻 ′ and 𝑒𝐻 ′′ of the two method sequences, respectively,
noted 𝑒𝑞𝑠 ⊪ 𝑒𝐻 1 ∼ 𝑒𝐻 2 , and when the state invariant and the
invariants of the two sequences are satisfied.
The state invariant inv(𝑒Σ) = ˜𝑐𝑒Σ, is the set of invariants 𝑐˜ built
upon the fields’ invariants of the objects’ classes contained in the
heap 𝑒𝐻 of 𝑒Σ, and closed by the actual values of the fields in 𝑒𝐻 .
The weak state invariant, noted weak_inv(𝑒Σ), is the subset of
the invariants of inv(𝑒Σ) s.t. their fields are marked as weak in
their classes.
Let fv( ˜𝑐) denote the free variables of a set of invariants ˜𝑐.
Two method definitions Md 1 and Md 2 commute. w.r.t. equality
case h, equations 𝑒𝑞𝑠, and invariants ˜𝑐, noted
𝑒𝑞𝑠; 𝑐˜ |=h Md 1 ⇄ Md 2
whenever
h
• Md 1 ; Md 2 −→ 𝑒𝐻 ′, sf ′, 𝑐˜′ ;
h
• Md 2 ; Md 1 −→ 𝑒𝐻 ′′, sf ′′, 𝑐 ˜′′ ;
′
• 𝑒𝑞𝑠 ⊪ 𝑒𝐻 ∼ 𝑒𝐻 ′′ ; and
• 𝑐˜ = inv(gen(h, Md 1, Md 2 )), 𝑐˜′, 𝑐 ˜′′ .

The static analysis of local permissibility provides the poststate invariant3 that must hold after the symbolic execution of
the method when the pre-state invariant and the method’s preconditions hold: that is, the analysis returns a proposition (e.g. a term
of type Prop in Coq) that must be SAT in order to establish local
permissibility.
Static Analysis of Locally Permissible Methods. Let Md be a method
s.t. this : 𝐶 ⊢ Md ⊲ ( ˜𝑐, 𝐸), and let 𝑒cfg = ⟨𝑒Σ, ( ˜𝑐, 𝐸), null⟩, where
𝑒Σ contains a symbolic heap with an entry [this ↦→ (𝐶, 𝑒𝐹 )], for
some symbolic field map 𝑒𝐹 . Let updates (𝑒cfg) = 𝑒cfg ′ with 𝑒cfg ′
containing the state 𝑒Σ ′ and the effect (𝑐˜ ′, []).
We say that:
• Md is permissible in 𝑒Σ up-to 𝜙, noted sP(𝑒Σ, Md) = 𝜙,
whenever 𝜙 = inv(𝑒Σ) ∧ 𝑐˜ ′ ⇒ inv(𝑒Σ ′ );
• Md is not-permissible in 𝑒Σ up-to 𝜙, noted sNP(𝑒Σ, Md) = 𝜙,
whenever 𝜙 = inv(𝑒Σ) ∧ 𝑐˜ ′ ⇒ not(inv(𝑒Σ ′ )).
• Md is locally permissible in 𝑒Σ up-to 𝜙, noted
sLP(𝑒Σ, Md) = 𝜙,
whenever 𝜙 = ∀𝑥 ∈ fv(inv(𝑒Σ), 𝑐˜ ′ ) . sP(𝑒Σ, Md).
The Method Anticipation algorithm. (in Table 5), to decide when
two method calls can be swapped, resembles that in Table 3 but: (i) is
3 State-invariant is a notion presented in the beginning of § 3

source-level, that is, it analyzes two method definitions without relying on a state; (ii) returns a list of propositions whose conjunction
must be satisfied at runtime.
The algorithm works like this:
(1) after building the initial symbolic state (l2), generates the
conditions for commutativity (l3) and include them in the
result (l6);
(2) then, it adds to the result the sLP proposition for Md 2 in the
initial state (l6), and the disjunction of the sLP proposition
for Md 1 in the post state (l7) with a weak fields-quantified
conjunction of the implications preserving permissibility in
the pre and post states (l8–l10);
(3) finally, checks that Md 1 does not modify the strong fields
read by Md 2 : SFNIh (Md 1, Md 2 ) holds whenever
h

Md 1 ; Md 2 =⇒ 𝑒𝐻, (sf ′, sep, sf ′′ ), (𝑐˜ ′, 𝑐˜ ′′ ) and (𝜄, 𝑓 , r) ∈ sf ′′
imply (𝜄, 𝑓 , w) ∉ sf ′ ,
where r and w indicate a read and write access, respectively.
SFNIh (Md 1, Md 2 ) captures that fact methods Md 1 and Md 2 do
not interfere.
Example 4.2. Consider the sequence of methods getBalance and
accrueInterest in Listing 1 (abbreviated to g and a, respectively).
We want to find the conditions under which a call of a can be
anticipated w.r.t. a call of g in a (runtime) state Σ s.t. I(Σ).
Let 𝑧 and 𝑦 be the unistantiated variables of the field balance
and min_cash, respectively, and let 𝑖 be a shorthand for the formal
parameter of a.
The algorithm in Table 5 calculates the following values to populate the following list of propositions:
𝑒𝑞𝑠 = (𝑧 + 𝑧/100 ∗ 𝑖 = 𝑧 + 𝑧/100 ∗ 𝑖, 𝑦 = 𝑦);
𝑐𝑐 = (𝑧 ≥ 0, 𝑦 = 50);
sLP(𝑒Σ, a) ==
∀𝑧, 𝑦, 𝑖 . (𝑧 ≥ 0 ∧ 𝑦 = 50) ⇒ (𝑧 + 𝑧/100 ∗ 𝑖 ≥ 0 ∧ 𝑦 = 50);
sLP(𝑒Σ ′′, g) =
∀𝑧, 𝑦, 𝑖 . (𝑧+𝑧/100∗𝑖 ≥ 0∧𝑦 = 50) ⇒ (𝑧+𝑧/100∗𝑖 ≥ 0∧𝑦 = 50);
SFNI(h, w, d) (we omit the remaining values).
For any state Σ preserving its invariant, all invariants 𝑐 ∈ eqsΣ
are SAT, as well as the invariants in 𝑐𝑐Σ.
Next, we need to ensure that sLP(𝑒Σ, a) is SAT: this holds whenever 𝑖 ≥ −100. Since sLP(𝑒Σ ′′, g) is SAT, the disjunction is SAT as
well; the last entry of the list is trivially SAT. Therefore, accrueInterest
can be anticipated w.r.t. getBalance when the interest is greater
or equal to −100.
A JAVA IMPLEMENTATION

To assess the use of Ant in real-life examples, we implemented a
prototype that analyses Java Bytecode. It is a adaptation/generalization of the analysis presented in § 4 to cope with Java Bytecode
instruction set (including conditions and jumps) and the virtual
machine’s stack-based addressing mode. Weak fields an d field invariants are expressed through Java annotations. Preconditions
have been passed over by if instructions.
To generate and solve the equation system, we make use of
CVC4 [8] by the means of the Servois [2] commutativity condition
generator. The analysis generates an anticipation table (similar to
Table 6) with the calls that may cause conflicts and, for each of
these, the conditions on which a call may anticipate another. The

table is implemented as a map from method signatures (𝑚 2 ) onto
another map, whose keys are the signatures of the methods (𝑚 1 )
with which 𝑚 2 conflicts and the values are the conditions (as Java
lambda functions) for 𝑚 2 to anticipate 𝑚 1 . These lambda functions
have, as parameters, the list of arguments of each method.
We assessed how much time it takes to check anticipation. Although the implementation does not restrict the number of arguments of methods and the complexity of a query depends, naturally,
on the complexity of the condition to check, our experimental results show querying the table takes less than 0.001 𝑚𝑠, several
orders of magnitude lower than performing global synchronization.
We conclude that it is feasible to use our approach at runtime.
USE-CASES

Table 6 presents statistics of applying model to common use-cases.
For each, the number of weakly consistent fields, of field invariants,
of methods, as well as the result of the Ant analysis: number of
non-LP methods, of pairs of methods analyzed, of conflicts (noncommutative methods) detected, and possible anticipations.
Account. Consider the example presented in Listing 1. Method
init (i, for short) has been replaced by a Java constructor. Constructors are always LP and do not generate conflicts against methods
invoked on the object itself. The results of the static analysis are:
non-LP methods: transfer (t, for short), withdraw (w), and
accrueInterest (a).
non-commutative methods: when applied on the same account,
deposit (d), withdraw, transfer and accrueInterest itself with accrueInterest.
anticipatable methods: getBalance (g) can anticipate all method
calls; deposit can anticipate calls of LP methods; to anticipate deposit w.r.t. a non-LP method call, the two accounts must differ; to anticipate accrueInterest, the interest must be greater or equal −100; and, when the call
preceding accrueInterest is not a getBalance, the two
accounts must differ.
Auction. An Ebay-like auction where bid operations operate over
a weak state, while the closing (and deciding the winner) operates
over a strong state. Once the auction is closed, bid operations have
no impact. The operations are: bid (b) to place a new bid (that
must be higher than the current), currentBid (cb), that returns
the value of current highest bid, close (c), that closes the auction,
and winner (w) that returns the identifier of the winning bidder.
close and bid only have side effects if the auction is open. An
auction’s state comprises two replicated fields of type Bid (with
the bidder and the bid): the weakly consistent current_bid and
the strong winner indicating the auction’s winner (with a special
value to indicate that the auction is still open). The results of the
static analysis are:
non-LP methods: none.
non-commutative methods: bid with close, when applied upon
the same auction.
anticipatable methods: currentBid and bid can anticipate each
other, close can anticipate itself, bid can anticipate itself
because two consecutive bids produce the same outcome:

the current bid becomes the highest of the two. All methods
can anticipate any other method of different auctions.
Counter. An eventually consistent Positive-Negative (PN) counter
(like a PN-counter CRDT [11]), with operations to increment (i),
decrement (d) and read (r). The results of the static analysis are:
non-LP methods: none. non-commutative methods: none. anticipatable methods: all (as expected in a CRDT-like datatype).
Register. A Last-Writer-Wins Register with two base operations:
set(value, sequenceNumber, replicaId) and get(), and a second set operation set(value) that calls
set(value, seqNumber++, localReplicaId).
Each replica features three weak replicated fields: value, with the
register’s value, seqNumber, with the sequence number of the last
update to field value, and replicaId, with the identifier of the
replica that emitted such update. localReplicaId is an not replicated constant field with the identifer of the local replica. The
results of the static analysis are: non-LP methods: none. noncommutative methods: none. anticipatable methods: get can
always anticipate, as well as be anticipated, set can anticipate itself.
ANT AND COORDINATION SYNTHESIS

In this section we present how Ant can contribute to the synthesis
of the coordination level needed to execute a given method call.
Strong consistency. A method call is a strongly consistent operation requiring distributed coordination if it either: (i) accesses a
strong field, or (ii) breaks the invariant of at least one weak field (it
is not LP). Examples of (i) are calls to method close of Auction. As
expected, no method call that reads or writes the same auction can
be anticipated w.r.t. close and vice-versa (see Table 6). The same
happens to the calls that fall in category (ii) whenever an invariant
may be broken. Examples are calls to withdraw of Account.
Causal consistency. Under causal consistency, causally related
method calls cannot anticipate one another. Causal relations and
session guarantees are orthogonal to the notion of call anticipation,
and should be treated upstream. Given two methods calls 𝑚𝑐 1 and
𝑚𝑐 2 , if 𝑚𝑐 1 is under coordination and there are no causal dependencies between both calls, the table produced by Ant can be used
to check if 𝑚𝑐 2 may anticipate 𝑚𝑐 1 .
Eventual consistency. Every LP method call that only accesses
weak fields and whose side effects do not depend on the effects
of any other call may execute with eventual consistency. Trivial
examples are calls to the methods from a weakly consistent PNcounter that features a weak single field.
RELATED WORK

In Kraska et al. [12], DCCT [22] and MixT [19], as in Ant, consistency guarantees are bound to data. However, in these proposals,
the programmer must reason about the consistency levels, explicitly binding data to consistency categories, such as serializable or
eventual, which contrasts with Ant’s weak. All of them preclude
the coexistence of operations with different consistency levels over
the same data. Moreover, no reference is made to which operations/transactions may execute concurrently, i.e. to call anticipation.

𝑐

Table 6: Statistics on the use-cases. 𝑚 2 −
→ 𝑚 1 indicates that, given a sequence 𝑚 1 ; 𝑚 2 , method 𝑚 2 can anticipate 𝑚 1 when 𝑐 holds,
thus giving rise to the sequence 𝑚 2 ; 𝑚 1 .
Use-case

# weak/
# strong

# invs

# mtds

Account

1/1
6

#

non-LP

# pairs

# conflicts

# anticipations
21
a −−−−−−→ g, a −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ {d, t, w, a},
0
g−
→ *, d −
→ {d, g}, d −−−−−−−−−→ {t, w, a}
b−
→ cb, cb −
→ *, c −
→ c, b −
→b
*−
→*
g−
→ *, * −
→ g, s −
→ s,

𝑖 ≥−100

this1 ̸  this2 ∧𝑖 2 ≥−100

this1 ̸ this2

Auction
Counter
Register

1/1
1/0
3/0
0
4
2
0
Red-blue consistency [6] colors operations, red or blue, according to whether they require global coordination or not. Thus, contrarily to Ant, consistency guarantees are attached to operations.
Although the work provides a set of rules for labeling operations
blue, it is up to the programmer to reason about operation commutativity and invariant violation. Gotsman et al. [5] go a step
further, providing a proof rule for assessing if a choice of consistency guarantees for a set of operations over a replicated state is
sufficient to preserve the data integrity invariant. Also, in red-blue,
all operations that are not globally commutative must be totally ordered. Partial Order-Restrictions consistency (Olisipo) [18] tackles
this issue by allowing for the definition of a set of restrictions that
must be met in all partial orders of the operations. Ant establishes
partial order relationships by design, as operations operating over
different data objects do not conflict with each other.
Sieve [7] automates the choice of the red-blue consistency levels
for operations over replicated databases. Programmers need to annotate the database’s schema with the CRDTs [11] that encapsulate
the merge semantics of a table or of a table field. Sieve and Olisipo
use Weakest Pre-condition Calculi to find restrictions for preserving
invariants, and use commutativity analysis to compute which operations may execute concurrently. To the best of our knowledge, as
in Hamsaz, the output is true or false, which is a weaker result than
our static analysis that is able to output parameterized conditions
that may be instantiated at runtime to check for conflicts.
Quelea [21] and Indigo [13] propose contract-based approaches
to specify consistency requirements. Given the specifications both
strategies identify which operations may, or may not, safely execute
concurrently. In Quelea, the programmer must reason about the
effects of each operation/transaction and how these interfere with
each other. Failing to identify a conflict will result in a contract
that, although correct, does not reflect the necessary constraints.
Ant assumes some of this burden, inferring the effects from the
annotated data and detecting possible conflicts by conducting a
static analysis. In Indigo, the programmer must provide the list
of invariants over the application’s state and a list of effects per
operation. The programmer does not have to reason about effect
interference, but rather about which are the effects produced by
each operation. A single missing or miswritten effect may render the
specification incorrect. Ant has thus the advantage of automating
the inference of the effects and performing the subsequent invariant
violation and conflict analyses. On the other hand, Indigo allows to
specify invariants that relate multiple data items.
AutoGr [10] provides an automated way of geo-replicate nonreplicated applications, relying on the framework Olisipo and using
6
the static analysis tool Rigi to automatically identify potentially
conflicting operations. Ant works directly on the source code and
also defines a static analysis, but not only to detect conflicts: it
provides the run-time with information of which operations may
be anticipated as no coordination is required.
CONCLUSIONS

This paper presents Ant, a novel language-based call anticipation
static analysis for applications with mixed consistency. The main
notions are formally defined in § 4. We develop Ant over OOlong,
an object-oriented core programming calculus, rigorously defined
and mechanized to ensure type safety. The static analysis we devise
and present herein infers the effects of the language’s methods, and
uses such effects to check which methods are locally permissible,
which pairs of methods commute and, ultimately, in which conditions method calls may be anticipated. All these notions were
implemented and type-checked in a functional language and are
publicly available.
Our proposal distinguishes itself from the state-of-the-art by enabling the anticipation of method calls: it provides, for each pair of
methods, a system of inequalities over objects’ fields and methods’
parameters that must be satisfied at runtime. To illustrate the applicability and expressiveness of our approach, § 6 presents the output
of the analysis for a set of significant examples commonly used in
the literature. The results demonstrate the viability of the methodology we devised. Moreover, a Java implementation (presented in
§ 5) further strengths the usability of the analysis.
Finally, we discuss how Ant can be used in the synthesis of
the coordination required for each method call, so that the modifications to replicated state comply to the consistency annotations
provided in the source code (see § 7).
In future work, we will mechanise the static analysis soundness,
and add constructs like conditionals and loops to the language.