Testing RESTful APIs: A Survey
Amid Golmohammadi, Man Zhang, Andrea Arcuri
Kristiania University College and Oslo Metropolitan University, Norway

Abstract
In industry, RESTful APIs are widely used to build modern Cloud Applications. Testing them
is challenging, because not only they rely on network communications, but also they deal with
external services like databases. Therefore, there has been a large amount of research sprout in
recent years on how to automatically verify this kind of web services. In this paper, we review
the current state-of-the-art on testing RESTful APIs, based on an analysis of 92 scientific articles.
This review categories and summarizes the existing scientific work on this topic, and discusses the
current challenges in the verification of RESTful APIs.

Keywords: survey, literature review, REST, API, testing, test case generation, fuzzing, web
service
Introduction

When building the backends for web and enterprise applications, using RESTful APIs [91] is a common
choice, especially in microservice architectures [132]. Many companies use this kind of systems for
their backends, like for example Netflix, Uber, Airbnb, eBay, Amazon, Twitter, Nike, etc [138].
Not only RESTful APIs are used to build the backends of enterprise applications, but also there are
many of this kind of APIs directly available on internet, providing all different kinds of functionalities.
For example, ProgrammableWeb 1 currently lists more than 24 thousand Web APIs, where RESTful
ones are the most common (other kinds are for example the old SOAP [83] and the more recent
GraphQL [17]). Several companies provide APIs to their services on internet using REST, such as for
example Google2 , Amazon3 , Twitter4 , Reddit5 , and LinkedIn6 .
However, verifying the correctness of Web APIs is quite challenging [74, 72]. Not only a tester
needs to create network messages (e.g., using HTTP over TCP) toward the API, but typically there is
also the need to setup the right data into the databases and possibly mock interactions with other
external services [48]. Due to their wide use in industry, it is hence not surprising that there has been
a lot of attention from the research community on the developing of novel techniques to test this kind
of applications in recent years. Therefore, to help carrying out further research endeavors on this topic,
in this paper we survey and categorize the current state-of-the-art of the scientific literature on testing
RESTful APIs. In particular, in this paper we aim at answering the following 12 research questions
from four perspectives based on a selection of 92 scientific articles:
• Publication status in testing RESTful APIs
– RQ1: How many papers were published per year?
– RQ2: In which venues were the papers published?
– RQ3: What contributions to testing RESTful APIs have been made by the papers in this
area, and what are their frequencies?
https://www.programmableweb.com/api-research
https://developers.google.com/drive/v2/reference/
http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/Welcome.html
https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public
https://www.reddit.com/dev/api/
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/linkedin/
1

• Existing approaches in supporting automated testing of RESTful APIs
– RQ4: What metrics are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the testing?
– RQ5: What techniques are used for automatically testing RESTful APIs?
– RQ6: What kind of testing has been automated for RESTful APIs?
– RQ7: What kind of artifacts are used for conducting empirical evaluations?
• Available Tools for Testing RESTful APIs
– RQ8: Which research tools are open-source?
– RQ9: Which non-research tools are used/compared?
– RQ10: Which features are supported by the research prototypes?
• Addressed and Open Challenges
– RQ11: Which research challenges are addressed?
– RQ12: Which open research challenges are identified?
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses important background information, needed
to better understand the rest of the paper. Related work is discussed then in Section 3. How the
92 articles were selected is described in Section 4. Our research questions are answered in Section 5
(publication status, RQ1-3), Section 6 (approaches, RQ4-7), Section 7 (tools, RQ8-10), and Section 8
(challenges, RQ11-12). Threats to validity are discussed in Section 9. Finally, Section 10 concludes the
paper.
Background

2.1

Hypertext Transfer Protocol and REST

HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) is an application-layer protocol for hypermedia information
systems that are distributed and collaborative over a computer network. Through the extension of its
request methods, error codes, and headers, this generic and stateless protocol can be used for many
tasks other than hypertext, such as name servers and distributed object management systems [90].
REST (Representational State Transfer) is an architectural style which was introduced by Fielding
in 2000 [91] that is followed by many modern web APIs. REST is not a protocol, as it just defines a
set of guidelines for designing APIs for accessing and manipulating resources using HTTP over the
network.
To reduce interaction latency, enforce security, and encapsulate legacy systems, REST stresses
scalability of component interactions, generality of interfaces, autonomous deployment of components,
and intermediary components. REST does not enforce any rules on how it should be implemented at
the lower level. Instead, it defines a set of high-level design constraints including separation of concerns
related to client and server, statelessness, the ability to cache data, having a uniform interface between
components, multilayeredness and code-on-demand (this latter is optional). It encourages users to
come up with their own solutions as it is neither a protocol, nor a standard. This means that it can be
implemented in a variety of ways and there is no enforcement to adopt any specific design pattern. For
instance, REST does not force the application to embrace SOLID [133] principles such as Dependency
Inversion. Despite it is better to adhere to those kinds of design principles to have more sustainable
applications, none of the REST constraints get violated in case a high level module (e.g., the code
which defines API endpoints) is tightly coupled to a low level module (e.g., a module to connect to
an SQL database). A REST API can be implemented with different programming languages (e.g.,
Python7 , C#8 ) and frameworks (e.g., Express9 and Ruby on Rails10 ).
https://www.python.org/
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/
https://expressjs.com/
https://rubyonrails.org/
2

In a RESTful API, any piece of information that we can think of can be referred to as a resource.
A document or image, for example, can be a REST resource, as can a temporal service, a collection of
other resources, or a non-virtual object (e.g., an employee) [28]. A RESTful API sends a representation
of the resource’s state to the caller when a client request is made. JSON (Javascript Object Notation),
HTML, and plain text are among common data formats that can be sent via HTTP. Among them,
JSON is the most widely used file format [131] because, contrary to its name, it is language-independent
and understandable by both humans and machines.
In order to specify the desired action to be taken for a certain resource, HTTP specifies a number
of request methods. These request methods are commonly referred to as HTTP verbs. Multiple actions
can be done on a resource by taking advantage of HTTP verbs such as GET and POST. For example,
a list of employees can be retrieved by invoking the URL for employees (e.g., ‘‘/employees” which
is appended to the base URL of the API) with GET. As another example, a single employee can be
fetched by calling its URL (e.g., ‘‘/employees/42’’, where 42 is the identifier of the intended employee).
Similarly, a new employee can be added by invoking the same URL for retrieving the list of employees
with POST verb and including the data of the new employee in the body payload of the HTTP request.
There are three other HTTP verbs that are used frequently within RESTful APIs, including PUT,
PATCH and DELETE. These verbs are utilized for updating by replacing, updating by modification and
deleting a resource, respectively.

2.2

OpenAPI

The OpenAPI Specification (OAS)11 defines a common, language-independent interface to RESTful
APIs [25]. It enables both humans and machines to learn about and comprehend the capabilities
of the service without having access to the service’s source code or network traffic analysis. A user
can comprehend and use a remote service with minimal implementation logic when it is properly
defined. An OpenAPI specification can then be utilized by automated tools for creating user-friendly
documentation (e.g., an interactive web page) to display the API, tools for creating code to generate
server stubs and client libraries in different programming languages, tools for testing, and many more
use cases [24].
The OAS defines an OpenAPI document as an object that may be expressed in either JSON or
YAML. Primitive data types in the OAS are based on the types supported by JSON specification [21].
Figure 1 displays a sample OpenAPI document in JSON format. It gives information to the client on
how to invoke endpoints in this API, such as which URIs and which HTTP verbs must be used to
invoke that specific endpoint, and also what parameters might be needed and their data types. In this
example (Figure 1), there are only two simple GET endpoints: the first one’s URL is ‘‘/employee’’,
which does not take any input parameters. The second one has the same URL, in addition to an input
parameter of type integer.
OpenAPI is one of the widely used techniques to define the schema of a REST API. There are other
languages which can be used to describe APIs, such as RAML12 and APIBluePrint13 . However, they
are not as commonly used as OpenAPI, especially for the purpose of fuzzing. Fuzzing is the process of
creating and running tests automatically with the intention of identifying flaws [147]. Finding inputs
that cause inappropriate program execution as a result of improper input data processing is the major
goal of fuzzing [164]. Many fuzzing tools [59, 50, 108, 100] rely on OpenAPI specification as it outlines
how to use a REST API, including the types of requests it can handle, the possible responses, and the
format of the possible responses.
Related Work

In software engineering research, there are several surveys that summarize, categorize and analyze
the current state-of-the-art on different research topics. Examples include search-based test case
https://swagger.io/specification/
https://raml.org/
https://apiblueprint.org/
3
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46

{
" openapi " : " 3.0.1 " ,
" info " : {
" title " : " Employees API " ,
" version " : " v1 "
},
" paths " : {
" / employee /{ id } " : {
" get " : {
" tags " : [
" Employee "
],
" parameters " : [
{
" name " : " id " ,
" in " : " path " ,
" required " : true ,
" schema " : {
" type " : " integer " ,
" format " : " int32 "
}
}
],
" responses " : {
" 200 " : {..} ,
" 400 " : {..} ,
" 401 " : {..}
}
}
},
" / employee " : {
" get " : {
" tags " : [
" Employee "
],
" responses " : {
" 200 " : {..} ,
" 400 " : {..} ,
" 401 " : {..}
}
}
}
},
" components " : {..}
}

Figure 1: An example of OpenAPI 3.0 schema
generation [46], search based mutation testing [142], software-testing education [94], test case selection
and prioritization using machine learning [135], software testing effort estimation [70], software
robustness assessment [109], oracle problem in software testing [66], flaky tests [136] and software
engineering for AI-based systems [127].
Regarding the testing of web services, some old surveys (from 2009 and 2013) analyzed the challenges
of testing service-oriented architectures [74, 72]. However, as they are old, they do not represent
the current state-of-the-art, especially considering the blossoming of research activities from 2017 on
(which will be discussed in more details in Section 5.1).
There is currently another short survey on the testing of RESTful APIs [87], published in the
Applied Sciences journal in 2022. Such survey is based on 16 published articles, addressing the following
research questions:
• RQ-1: What are the main challenges in generating unit tests for RESTful APIs?
• RQ-2: What are the code coverage concerns when it comes to testing RESTful APIs?
• RQ-3: What solutions are currently available to meet testing and unit test generation challenges?
• RQ-4: What support do solutions provide for authentication-enabled RESTful APIs’ testing and
unit test generation?
Our survey is much larger, covering 92 articles instead of just 16 (and all these 16 are included in
our analyses). Furthermore, compared to those 4 RQs listed in [87], we answer many more research
questions from various perspectives (e.g., testing metrics, testing kinds, existing fuzzers and challenges),
in order to provide a better overview of the current state-of-the-art in this domain.
Research Method

4.1

Research Questions

To investigate current research in addressing REST API testing, we conduct a systematic literature
review (SLR) to answer the following research questions from four perspectives:
• Publication status in testing RESTful APIs
– RQ1: How many papers were published per year?
– RQ2: In which venues were the papers published?
– RQ3: What contributions to testing RESTful APIs have been made by the papers in this
area, and what are their frequencies?
• Existing approaches in supporting automated testing of RESTful APIs
– RQ4: What metrics are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the testing?
– RQ5: What techniques are used for automatically testing RESTful APIs?
– RQ6: What kind of testing has been automated for RESTful APIs?
– RQ7: What kind of artifacts are used for conducting empirical evaluations?
• Available Tools for Testing RESTful APIs
– RQ8: Which research tools are open-source?
– RQ9: Which non-research tools are used/compared?
– RQ10: Which features are supported by the research prototypes?
• Addressed and Open Challenges
– RQ11: Which research challenges are addressed?
– RQ12: Which open research challenges are identified?

4.2

Database and Search Queries

To find relevant papers, we took advantage of seven databases as listed in Table 1. These online
repositories of peer-reviewed articles were selected based on their popularity and extent of relevance to
software engineering research. These sources contain well-known conferences and journals in the field.
Existing surveys in software engineering research (e.g., [135, 70] widely referenced them, as they offer
a variety of authoritative publication venues in the field.
In order to achieve the objectives of this work and answer our research questions, we put together
our search terms according to the specific format of each database. The queries were formulated around
the concept of applying testing on RESTful APIs. In some databases, such as IEEE and ACM, to
have more relevant results, we excluded the papers which do not contain at least one of the commonly
used terms in the literature in any part of them (e.g., by using Anywhere in ACM) including black box,
white box, fuzzing, fuzzer, unit test, system test, end to end test and integration test. The numbers of
papers found as the result of search queries are shown in Table 1. The search was conducted on March
1, 2022.
Table 1: Selected databases, with search queries and number of found articles

Name

Search Query

Found Papers

IEEE

(”Document Title”:restful OR ”Index Terms”:restful OR ”Document Title”:rest OR ”Index Terms”:rest) AND (”Document Title”:test* OR ”Index
Terms”:test*) AND (”Full Text .AND. Metadata”:”white box” OR ”Full
Text .AND. Metadata”:”black box” OR ”Full Text .AND. Metadata”:fuzz*
OR ”Full Text .AND. Metadata”:”unit test*” OR ”Full Text .AND. Metadata”:”integration testing” OR ”Full Text .AND. Metadata”:”system test*”
OR ”Full Text .AND. Metadata”:”end to end test*”)
ACM

(Title:(restful) OR Keywords:(restful) OR Title:(rest) OR Keywords:(rest))
AND (Title:(test*) OR Keyword:(test*)) AND (Anywhere:(white box) OR Anywhere:(black box) OR Anywhere:(fuzz*) OR Anywhere:(”unit test”) OR Anywhere:(”unit tests”) OR Anywhere:(”unit testing”) OR Anywhere:(”integration
test”) OR Anywhere:(”integration tests”) OR Anywhere:(”integration testing”) OR Anywhere:(”system test”) OR Anywhere:(”system tests”) OR Anywhere:(”system testing”) OR Anywhere:(”end to end test”) OR Anywhere:(”end
to end tests”) OR Anywhere:(”end to end testing”))
ScienceDirect

Title, abstract, keywords: (restful OR ”rest api” OR ”rest apis” OR ”rest
service” OR ”rest services” OR ”rest web services”) AND (test OR testing OR
tests)
Subjects: Computer Science
Wiley

(test*) AND (restful OR ”REST API” OR ”REST APIs” OR ”REST service”
OR ”REST services” OR ”REST web service” OR ”REST web services”)
Subjects: Computer Science
Web of Science

(TI=(restful) OR AK=(restful) OR TI=(”rest api”*) OR AK=(”rest api”*) OR
TI=(”rest service”*) OR AK=(”rest service”*) OR TI=(”rest web service”*)
OR AK=(”rest web service”*)) AND (TI=(test*) OR AK=(test*))
MIT Libraries

Abstract contains: (restful OR ”rest api*” OR ”rest service*” OR ”rest web
service*”) AND (test*) AND Any field contains: ”black box” OR ”white box”
OR ”unit test*” OR ”integration test*” OR ”system test*” OR ”end to end
test*” OR fuzz*
Springer

restful AND test AND api
Articles within Computer Science and Software Engineering/Programming and
Operating Systems
Each repository had its own limitations to conduct advanced searches. For example, unlike IEEE
and ACM, it did not seem to be possible to formulate an advanced search query in Springer. At the
time of writing this survey, there was no feature to limit the results based on different sections of the
paper (e.g., Title or Abstract) in Springer. Therefore, the only option we had was to do a broad search
query and limiting it by subject (i.e., Computer Science and then Software Engineering/Programming
and Operating Systems) and type of the study (i.e., Article). In ScienceDirect, there was a limitation
for boolean operators. It did not allow more than 8 boolean operators, so we were not able to include
terms such as SBST. Another impediment with this repository was that it did not support wildcards.

4.3

Paper Selection Criteria

Table 2 introduces the inclusion criteria we used to select papers. In general, we chose papers that
are written in English, and that are related to testing in the domain of REST APIs. However, to be
included, an article did not have to be exclusively in the domain of REST. It could be generally about
web services, cloud services, etc., which might encompass RESTful APIs as well. We excluded theses
(e.g., MSc and PhD). We also excluded existing surveys, as those are rather discussed in our Related
Work (Section 3).
Table 2: Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria

Criterion
2
4
4.4

The paper is in English
The paper is related to testing
The paper is about REST. It does not have to be exclusively about REST.
The paper is not a thesis.
The paper is not a survey or a systematic literature review.

Snowballing

The idea of conducting this phase was to employ a hybrid search strategy to reduce the chance of
missing important relevant papers. To do so, we conducted forward and backward snowballing on
June 14th, 2022. Forward and backward snowballing refer to checking the reference list and citations
of a paper, respectively. To find citations of a paper, we took advantage of Google Scholar 14 . By
studying and evaluating them based on the defined inclusion criteria, we finally gathered 92 papers
in total, including 40 ones which were initially found by search and also 52 new ones by conducting
snowballing.
There are several reasons why the number of papers found in this step are considerably larger than
that of found during the initial search. First, some of the papers were published after March 1st, 2022,
which is the date we conducted the initial search. This group includes 16 papers. Second, 15 papers
were only available in sources that were not among those which had been selected to conduct the
initial search (see Table 1). These sources include arXiv, Penn State, KSIResearch, Open Journals,
unam.mx, Semantic Scholar, sistedes.es and Macrothink Institute. The third reason could be that the
approach might not be specific to REST, and the term REST might be not present in either the title,
abstract or keywords. However, during the snowballing phase, if we found papers where the proposed
approach was evaluated on REST APIs, then we include them in this survey. In addition, there might
exist some bugs in the search services provided by the article databases. For instance, by taking a
look at the paper [165], we found out that this should had appeared in results of the initial search as
it fits our search query, but surprisingly did not. Then, we reported such issues to the service (i.e.,
ACM), and those have been confirmed and fixed by now.

4.5

Data Extraction

Table 3 contains the types of extracted data for each research question. We designed a spreadsheet
in Google Sheets to put together collected data from the selected papers. This included name of the
paper, a unique given ID and information related to answering research questions. Before conducting
the data extraction, we prepared a list of possible categories and relevant keywords to search for (e.g.,
black-box and white-box ), and refined such selection while investigating each paper. However, by
starting to study the papers, we found some other possible values. For example, regarding RQ5, we
found out that not all the papers use either black-box or white-box techniques, and also they can be
both supported at the same time (e.g.,[51]).
To conduct the data extraction, the papers were divided between two of the authors. Each of them
extracted the data based on the types shown in Table 3. Then, the results were double-checked by the
other author. In case of any discrepancy, the issue was discussed and settled by the third author.
Status of Publications in REST API Testing

To study the trends of research in REST API testing, in this section we report our investigation on
existing studies of REST API testing with academic publications. These findings are categorized in
terms of time (RQ1), venues (RQ2), and main contributions (RQ3).
http://scholar.google.com/
Table 3: Type of Data Extracted Per Research Question
RQs

Type of Extracted Data

RQ1
RQ2
RQ3

The number of papers per year
The number of papers per venue
1) Types of contribution of the papers, and
2) The number of papers per contribution type
Existing metrics which have been applied for guiding/evaluating REST API testing
Existing testing techniques for REST APIs
Types of testing which REST API testing approaches support
1) Types of artifacts which have been used for conducting evaluation of REST API testing, and
2) Locations and availability of the artifacts
1) REST API testing approaches which have the open-source prototype, and
2) Replicability of experiments conducted with the prototypes
Existing non-research tools which have been applied for REST API testing
Features which have been supported by research prototypes of REST API testing
Research questions and hypotheses which have been studied in REST APIs testing
Open challenges which have been identified in testing REST APIs

RQ4
RQ5
RQ6
RQ7
RQ8
RQ9
RQ10
RQ11
RQ12

5.1

RQ1: How many papers were published per year?

Figure 2 illustrates the amount of papers published from 2009 to 2022. It shows that there has been
an upward trend in the number of papers in the domain of RESTful APIs testing during recent years.
There was not a considerable number of studies before 2017, as the number has fluctuated between
0 and 2. However, the quantity of published papers has increased dramatically from 2017 onward. In
2018, 8 papers were published and this number further increased and reached to the highest, 24, in
2021. At the time of finalizing the selected papers for this survey (June 2022), only half of the year
2022 has passed. This is the reason why the number of papers published in 2022 is lower than that of
2021.
24
15
10

Number of papers
5
4
1
2
0
1

2010

2012
2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Year

Figure 2: Number of selected papers (y-axis) per year (x-axis)
RQ1: Since 2017, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of scientific studies on testing
REST APIs.
5.2

RQ2: In which venues were the papers published?

Papers selected for this survey have been published in a variety of venues. Table 4 gives information
about the number of papers being published in each venue and its type. A venue can be of type
conference, journal or other open-access repositories. The table is sorted in descending order, based
on the number of papers. To keep the table short, we represent a full name of a venue only if: (1)
more than one paper is published in the venue or (2) a journal article is published by one of the main
publishers in the field of software engineering (i.e., ACM, Elsevier, IEEE, Springer, Wiley). For others,
we categorized them into Other Conferences and Other Journals based on the venue type.
Based on Table 4, 92 studies of REST API testing have been published in 63 various venues (i.e., 48
conference venues, 14 journals venues and 1 open access repository) which have covered well-known
top SE venues, such as TOSEM, TSE, EMSE and ICSE. Regarding conference publications, there are
in total 66 papers. On top, with 43 papers, there is Other Conferences, which aggregates the amount
of papers from conferences with a single publication. The most common venues are ICSE (ACM/IEEE
International Conference of Software Engineering) and ICST (IEEE International Conference on
Software Testing, Verification and Validation), with 7 and 6 papers. In addition, 20 articles have been
published in journals, and the most frequent journal is TOSEM. It is a peer-reviewed journal published
by ACM, which stands for ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology. Besides,
there also exist 6 papers which have been submitted to a non-peer reviewed open access repository, i.e.,
arXiv.
Table 4: Number of papers per venue and their type

Venue
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Number of Papers

Other Conferences
Other Journals
ICSE
arXiv
ICST
TOSEM
QRS
IEEE TSE
ESEC/FSE
GECCO
ISSTA
Applied Soft Computing
EMSE
IEEE Software
IEEE TSC
8
6
5
3
2
1
1
Venue Type
Conference
Journal
Conference
Open-access Repository
Conference
Journal
Conference
Journal
Conference
Conference
Conference
Journal
Journal
Journal
Journal

RQ2: From 2009 to 2022, scientific work on testing RESTful APIs was published in 63 different
venues, where ICSE/ICST and TOSEM were the most frequent conferences and journal, respectively.

5.3

RQ3: What contributions to testing RESTful APIs have been made by the
papers in this area, and what are their frequencies?

To better study what contributions have been made in existing studies, we defined 5 different categories
to classify main contributions of selected papers, as follows.
• New automated approach and its extension
This category includes papers which propose a new tool, algorithm, framework or method for
automated testing of REST APIs and its integrated extensions for enhancing the automated
approach. For example, regarding automated test case generation for REST APIs, Arcuri
proposed the Many Independent Objective (MIO) algorithm specific to white-box system level
test generation [49], and enabled search-based software testing (SBST) of REST APIs with
MIO [50], implemented as an open-source fuzzer, named EvoMaster. To further improve the
SBST of REST APIs, SQL handling [53] and testability transformation [55] were integrated
into EvoMaster. However, such extension techniques can be used outside of REST APIs, i.e.,
applied for testing of other domains. Another example for test data generation is ARTE, which
is an approach presented in [150] to automatically extract realistic data inputs for REST APIs
from knowledge bases (e.g., DBpedia) by taking advantage of a number of techniques, including
natural language processing, search-based, and knowledge extraction. To make ARTE fully
automated, it is integrated into RESTest [126].
• New analysis approach and potential solution
Studies which, instead of proposing a new approach for directly achieving automated testing,
help to analyze testing related aspects (such as coverage metrics) and identify potential solutions
for testing of REST APIs, fall into this category. For instance, Marculescu et al. [118] studied
faults in RESTful APIs selected from EMB repository [9], and proposed a taxonomy of the faults
identified in the REST API with EvoMaster [118]. Martin-Lopez et al. [124] defined a set of
coverage metrics based on API schema in the context of black-box testing of REST APIs. Katt
and Prasher [69] identified potential security threats in REST APIs and proposed corresponding
quantitative security assurance metrics. In addition, Soni et al. [143] proposed a framework for
allowing mocking external dependencies of Java REST APIs. However, this mocking solution is
for unit testing, and it could be potentially adopted to automated testing approaches for enabling
additional handling of external services.
• Empirical study on various automated approaches
This group of papers focus on comparing existing approaches by conducting empirical evaluations.
For instance, the study conducted by Corradiani et al. in [80] automated black box approaches
for testing REST APIs have been compared by conducting an empirical comparison on them.
There also exist studies for comparing existing fuzzers for REST APIs [106] and analyzing open
problems [167] with the fuzzers.
• Tool implementation or demostration
Papers which mainly focus on implementation of a testing tool, or show how a tool can be used,
fall into this category. For instance, Restats is introduced in [81], which is a tool to compute
coverage metrics for black-box testing of REST APIs. This tool adopts the coverage metrics
proposed by Martin-Lopez et al. [124].
• Proposal or idea
These papers do not include any conducted study. Instead, they suggest a new idea or plan
to carry out research on the testing of REST APIs. For instance, Martin-Lopez in [119] was
planning to develop a framework for specification-driven testing that will automatically create
complex test cases for Web APIs and also intelligent programs (called “bots”) which can generate
a large number of inputs.
The data provided in the form of pie-chart in Figure 3 shows the share of selected papers based on
their main contribution. ‘‘New automated approach and its extension’’ has the highest percentage with
66%. ‘‘New analysis approach and potential solution’’ is the second largest category and comprises
of almost one-fifth of the papers by 18%. The three other categories are much smaller (e.g., 3% for
‘‘Empirical study on various automated approaches’’).
More details on the different categories and type contributions are presented and analyzed in the
following research questions.
RQ3: 5 different contributions were found from the main contributions of the selected 92 papers.
66% of the papers propose a new automated approach and its extension for testing RESTful APIs,
while 18% of the papers are new analysis approach and potential solution of REST API testing.
66%

3%
8%
4%
18%
EA: Empirical study on various automated approaches
NA: New automated approach and its extension
NP: New analysis approach and potential solution
PI: Proposal or idea
TD: Tool implementation or demostration

Figure 3: Types of paper contributions and their frequencies
Approaches to Testing REST API

One of the main objectives of this survey is to identify existing testing approaches which have been
developed to be automated in the context of REST APIs.
Figure 4 represents a high-level abstraction of testing of REST APIs. A RESTful API typically
exposes a schema about how to access the web service. The schema could be represented in various
ways (e.g., JSON, XML, formal model), and one popular technique to define the schema is OpenAPI,
as discussed in Section 2.2. As the schema defines the structure of the resources handled by SUT
and the available actions to access these resources [25, 170], it is often used as an input to test the
REST API, e.g., define metrics as test criteria, automatically generated tests (referred as the term
fuzzing [96]). The test generation is typically guided by heuristics aimed at optimizing those metrics.
Such metrics could be linked with behaviors of the SUT and data produced by the SUT offline or at
runtime. A test for a REST API can be regarded as a sequence of HTTP requests, e.g., a sequence
of POST /foo and GET /foo/42 as shown in Figure 4. In order to perform actions on the SUT, each
request has concrete values (referred as test data, e.g., 42) for its parameters, such as path parameters,
query parameters and body payload, if specified in the schema. In addition, endpoints of REST APIs
might be restricted with authentications, and the REST API could also connect to databases and
external web services (as shown in Figure 4). How to configure the authentication and handle such
external services are also part of REST API testing.
To study the existing approaches of REST API testing, we designed RQs 4--7 and reported results
of our investigation on metrics which include test criteria and heuristics (Section 6.1), techniques
(Section 6.2), kinds of testing which have be applied for (Section 6.3), and available artifacts used in
the empirical evaluations (Section 6.4).

6.1

RQ4: What metrics are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the testing?

With this SLR, based on the selected papers, we classified metrics into three types, i.e., coverage
criteria, fault detection and performance, as shown in Figure 5, and statistics of each type are shown
in Figure 6. Those are discussed next in more details.
6.1.1

Coverage Criteria

(1) schema related coverage
Figure 4: High-Level View of REST API Testing

Figure 5: Metrics employed for REST API Testing in the literature
20
30

n: 30

n: 17
n: 16
n: 14

n: 9
n: 5
5
n: 12

schema cov

code cov

other

5xx

incon schema

violating rule

performance

Figure 6: Statistics of metrics employed in automated testing of REST API
API schemas are main inputs to guide how to access the SUT and define what responses should be
returned. For instance, as an example of the schema defined with the OpenAPI (Figure 1), an endpoint
could be defined under a URI path with an HTTP verb (e.g., POST, GET), input parameters (e.g., Path
Parameter) and possible responses (e.g., status code, response body). Then, there exist several black-box
coverage metrics which are defined based on those elements [62, 121, 126, 86, 150, 149, 161, 113, 47]:
• HTTP status code could reflect a result of processing the request in the SUT, such as 2xx often
represents a successful request. A set of testing criteria has been defined in order to compute a
coverage of status codes which are returned during testing, for each endpoint [82, 51, 50, 59, 126,
154].
• path provides info to access the API, i.e., the full URI to access an endpoint could be constructed
by base path plus path. For instance, Martin-Lopez et al. [124] defined path coverage which
assesses a number of paths accessed by the generated tests out of the total available paths in the
schema. Banias et al. [62] evaluated paths tested by considering success and failure responses
received by requests to the path. Ed-douibi et al. [86] reported endpoint coverage, and an
endpoint is considered as covered only if all of its operations are covered.
• operations are exposed to make requests (i.e., HTTP verb with path) for performing actions on
the services. As discussed, a test is regarded as a sequence of the operations. To evaluate REST
API testing approaches, Banias et al. reported a number of operation tested in [62].
• input parameter is info required to set when making a request. The parameter could be different
with various types and constraints (e.g., required, minimum). Then the input parameter based
metrics are defined to assess if various values for the parameters have been examined during
testing (e.g., each boolean parameter should had been evaluated with both values true and
false). The generation could also be guided by the metrics, e.g., Banias et al. [62] defined
various configurations to generate tests with a consideration of the required property of the
parameters.
• response defines a list of possible responses to return per operation. Metrics relating to responses
are used to examine whether various responses have been obtained (e.g., for an enumeration
element in a returned body payload, coverage metrics would check if every single item in the
enumeration has been returned at least once). Response body property coverage is reported to
assess API schema based REST API testing approach in [62].
In addition, Martin-Lopez et al. [124] proposed 10 coverage metrics based on the schema that
have been applied for assessing REST API testing approaches in [62]. The 10 coverage metrics enable
assessments of generated tests in fuzzing REST APIs with different inputs and outputs, such as
parameter coverage, content-type coverage, response body properties coverage. The metrics were also
enabled in fuzzers, such as HsuanFuzz [149] and RESTest [126]. Restats [81] is a test coverage tool
for assessing given tests based on the coverage metrics. In an empirical study [80], such schema related
coverage metrics were employed to compare black-box fuzzers of REST APIs.
(2) code coverage
Code coverage is one typical white-box criterion for evaluating testing approaches. It was applied as
well to evaluate REST API fuzzers for both black-box [58, 59] and white-box [170, 51, 165, 53, 167, 166].
Among different code coverage criteria, line/statement coverage is one of the most common and
supported ones in industry-strength coverage tools (e.g., JaCoCo for Java programs).
Code coverage was also used as an evaluation metric to assess the black-box REST API testing
approaches [110, 113, 59, 149]. For instance, in [59], Atlidakis et al. reported accumulated code
coverage achieved along with a number of requests to be executed. To collect the code coverage,
TracePoint hook was configured in Ruby classes to trace the execution in this study. However,
black-box testing of REST API could be performed on remote public APIs which are closed source
software. The code coverage in this context is applied only for evaluation purposes.
Code coverage could also be employed as a criteria to automate fuzzing, which is considered
as white-box testing. EvoMaster enables runtime code coverage (with heuristics to maximize it)
automatically during fuzzing with code instrumentation. However, such automated collection of
runtime code coverage is specific to the programming language, and EvoMaster has enabled it for
JVM (e.g., Java and Kotlin) [50] and JavaScript [168]. In addition, Pythia [58] employs the metrics
of code coverage to produce tests. But, to enable such code coverage collection, it needs a pre-manual
step to extract code info (such as block location) of the SUT.
(3) other metrics
Besides schema-based and code coverage, there also exist other metrics specific to proposed
approaches [76, 150, 137, 67, 77, 113, 163, 112, 95, 114, 125, 116].
For instance, in RESTler [59], a grammar is derived based on the API schema for driving
following test sequence generation, e.g., selecting next HTTP request based on the derived producerconsumer dependencies among the endpoints. A specific metric employed in this approach is based
on the grammar, i.e., grammar coverage. Martin-Lopez et al. [122, 123, 125] defined inter-parameter
dependencies which represent constraints referring to two ore more input parameters. Such dependencies
are also used in RestCT to generate test data [160]. Alonso et al. [150] enabled test data generation
with realistic inputs using natural language processing and knowledge extraction techniques. The
performance of the data generation was evaluated from a percentage of valid API calls (i.e., 2xx
status code) and valid inputs (i.e., Syntactically valid and Semantically valid ). In [97], Godefroid et al.
introduced the error type metric which is a pair of error code and error message. The metric was used
to guide data fuzzing of REST API [97], i.e., maximizing error type coverage.
Chakrabarti and Rodriquez [76] defined POST Class Graph (PCG) to represent resources and
connected relationships among them, then tests could be produced by maximizing coverage of the
graph. UML state machine was applied in a model-based testing of REST APIs [137]. Metrics specific
to model such as state coverage and transition coverage are used to guide test generation.
Lin et al. [110] constructed tree-based graph to analyze resource and resource dependency based
on the API schema and responses. Then test cases could be generated based on the graph with tree
traversal algorithms.
To analyze security issues existing in REST API, Cheh and Chen [77] analyzed levels of sensitivity
of data fields and API calls, and also defined exposure level that calculates a degree of such data fields
and API calls exposed to potential attacks.
6.1.2

Fault Detection

(1) service error
The status code 5xx has been applied to identify potential faults in REST API testing [82, 62,
170, 139, 108, 51, 121, 146, 126, 103, 154, 59, 50, 169, 86, 165, 53, 150, 160, 166, 55, 149, 100, 113, 58,
65, 54, 52, 47, 125]. With HTTP, the status code 5xx indicates errors caused by the server, and the
request could not be processed until the server has been fixed. For instance, 500 status code is generic
to represent that an internal server error occurs when performing the given request. The status 503 is
more specific, stating that the service is unavailable, e.g., due to down for maintenance or the server is
overloaded.
In most HTTP frameworks, when there is a crash in the business logic due to some faults (e.g., an
unhandled null-pointer exception), the entire server does not crash. In these cases, the server would
still reply to the incoming HTTP request, responding with a status code of 500. Therefore, 500 status
codes in the responses can be used as an oracle to detect faults in RESTful APIs [100]. However, not
all 500 status codes are related to software faults. For example, if the API is connecting to a database,
and the database is currently down, the server would not be able to complete the request. In such a
case, returning a 500 status code would be correct, although no software fault in the API is involved.
(2) violation of schema
The API schema (such as OpenAPI) defines response syntax for each operation [82, 170, 108, 51, 121,
146, 154, 86, 165, 53, 166, 55, 54, 52], e.g., status code and response body. Actual responses should be
always consistent with the syntax specified in the schema. Thus, any inconsistency between the actual
response and the syntax could be regarded as faults in the REST API. For instance, Viglianisi et al.
defined such oracles in RestTestGen [154] by using an OpenAPI library15 to identify the mismatched
responses. In QuickRest [103], Karlsson et al. formulated such consistency as properties. EvoMaster
also reports the number of such faults at the end of fuzzing [55].
(3) violation of defined rules
Service errors (based on status code) and violation of schema (based on OpenAPI) are general
oracles for fault finding in the context of REST API. Besides, there also exist some oracles to identify
faults based on rules which characterize the REST APIs in terms of security, behavior, properties and
regression [108, 60, 103, 157, 141, 104, 89, 150, 63, 100, 77, 65, 163, 116] (see Figure 5).
Security. As web services, security is critical for REST APIs. To enable test oracle relating to
security, Atlidakis et al. [60] proposed a set of rules which formalize desirable security related properties
of the REST APIs. Any violation of the rules is identified as potential security related bugs in the
SUT. The rules are mainly defined based on assessing accessibility of resources, such as use-after-free
rule: if a resource has been deleted, it must not be accessible anymore.
Katt and Prasher [165] proposed an quantitative approach to measure the kinds of security related
metrics (i.e., vulnerability, security requirement and security assurance) for web services. To calculate
the metrics, test cases are defined for validating whether the SUT meets security requirements and any
kind of vulnerabilities exists. Masood and Java [128] identified various kinds of vulnerabilities which
could exist in REST APIs, such as JSON Hijacking. Such vulnerabilities could be detected with both
static analysis and dynamic analysis techniques. Barabanov et al. [63] proposed an approach specific
to detection of Insecure Direct Object Reference (IDOR)/Broken Object Level Authorization (BOLA)
vulnerabilities for REST APIs. The approach analyzes the OpenAPI specification by identifying
its elements (such as parameters) relating to IDOR/BOLA vulnerabilities, then generates tests for
verifying the API with such elements using defined security rules. Zha et al. [163] collected Common
Sense Security Policies (CSSP), such as Access control, URL spoofing and private messages for Team
Chat system and defined CSSP violation scenarios. Security and privacy risks can be identified if an
API under the CSSP violation scenarios can still work, e.g., return a valid response. Barlas et al. [65]
studied regex-based denial of service (ReDoS) vulnerabilities lead by handling of input sanitization in
https://github.com/bjansen/swagger-schema-validator
web services. The vulnerabilities is allowed to be identified by verifying consistency between client-side
and server.
Behavior. Based on the provided API schema, Ed-douibi et al. [86] defined two rules to generate
nominal test cases and faulty test cases. The nominal test cases take the inputs inferred based on
examples or constraints in the schema, and the successful response is expected to return (e.g., assert
that the status code is 2xx). Regarding the faulty test cases, it takes invalid inputs (e.g., missing
required parameters, a string for a number parameter, a string violating its defined pattern), and the
client error response is expected to return (e.g., assert that the status code is 4xx).
Liu et al. [112] constructed five constraints of REST guidelines with models. Then such models
could be used to verify design models of REST APIs. Any violation of the constraint models is
considered as a potential defect in its architecture design.
Pinheiro et al. [137] defined UML state machines for modeling behaviors of REST APIs. The actual
behavior (by executing the tests) should be consistent with the model (e.g., guard condition, invariant)
as expected. Any inconsistency is recognized as potential faults of the SUT.
Properties. Most of the HTTP methods are idempotent, i.e., GET, PUT, DELETE, HEAD,
OPTIONS and TRACE. For such methods, a result of executing the method is independent with the
number of repeated times, i.e., executing the method multiple times would not change the result as
executing it one time. Thus, assertions could be defined to check the idempotency [151], e.g., executing
multiple identical GET should result in the same response, after a successful DELETE, responses of
all following identical DELETE should be same. Connectedness is examined in [76] that refers to
accessibility among resources. For instance, assume that resource X owns resource Y, when perform a
GET collection on Y referring to X, all available Y should appear in the response, otherwise the REST
API is not ‘‘connected’’.
The REST API could apply HATEOAS (Hypermedia as the Engine of Application State). Then
the response might contain hypermedia links for accessing itself or other resources. For such responses,
Vassiliou-Gioles [151] defined assertions for validating availability of links in its response. In [156, 155],
Vu et al. also proposed a model-based approach which enables formalization of hypermedia behaviors
of the REST API with ε-NFA, and the model could allow an identification of the faults by checking
whether the SUT complies with it [157]. Fertig and Braun [89] also verified the REST APIs based on
hypermedia constraints using model-based approaches.
Metamorphic relations capture necessary properties which the SUT should hold with multiple
executions. To enable metamorphic testing of REST APIs, there exist several works to identify such
metamorphic relations of the web services with abstract Metamorphic Relation Output Patterns
(MROPs) [141, 117] (such as equivalence, disjoint) or specific properties of the API [114]. Then, faults
could be detected by checking whether responses among the multiple requests conform to the identified
relations.
Regression. Gazzola et al. [95] enables monitoring and tracing of the microservices in order to
record their execution. Such recorded execution slices can be abstracted and considered as a metric
for generating regression tests, i.e., verify whether the same response could be received with the same
request in the further version of the SUT. Godefroid et al. [98] employed RESTler to produce tests,
then enabled detection of regression faults by comparing behaviors with the same tests among different
versions of the REST APIs.
6.1.3

Performance Metrics

Performance related metrics are also important for REST API testing, as the SUT provides services over
the network. In [62], Banias et al. measured average response time of the requests generated by different
strategies. Fertig and Braun [89] discussed potential solutions to enable performance testing with modelbased approaches and existing techniques (such as Apache JMeter16 ). Schemathesis [100] defined
the proprieties relating to performance metrics, i.e., identify slow response and request amplification
with configured thresholds. Bucaille et al. [73] developed a testing framework which can assess and
monitor performance-related properties, such as latency, by sending requests from various geographical
https://jmeter.apache.org/
Table 5: Results of techniques for automated testing of REST APIs
Black-/White- box

#

Tehcniques

#

Papers

Black Box
search
model
property
others
8
28

Both
Hybrid
White Box
1
search
search
search
others
1
3

[111]
[126, 157, 86, 89, 107, 137, 112, 155]
[103, 141, 107, 76, 100, 67, 117, 114, 116]
[82, 62, 108, 129, 151, 60, 105, 154, 97, 171, 59, 98,
150, 73, 160, 110, 63, 149, 134, 77, 161, 113, 65, 163,
115, 130, 95, 125]
[51]
[121]
[170, 139, 146, 50, 169, 165, 53, 166, 55, 54, 52, 47]
[148, 58, 168]

Total
Note that we only considers the papers which contribute to propose new approach for automated testing of REST APIs.

locations using different cloud service providers.
RQ4: Fault detection was the most applied metric in REST API testing that can be identified based
on 5xx status codes, the given API schema and defined rules. Coverage criteria were the second
widely applied metrics that measure the degree to which aspects of the REST APIs are tested. In the
context of REST APIs, besides the traditional code coverage in white-box testing, schema based
coverage was mainly employ in the black-box testing. Performance metrics were rarely investigated
in REST API testing.

6.2

RQ5: What techniques are used for automatically testing RESTful APIs?

To answer this question, we conducted further analysis on 61 (out of 92) papers whose contributions
are categorized as ‘‘new automated approach and its extension’’ (see Section 5.3).
6.2.1

Black-box and White-box Testing

Based on our survey, there exist two main types of testing techniques to automate testing of REST
APIs, i.e., black-box and white-box. Regarding black-box testing, it enables to verify systems’ behaviors
with exposed endpoints, e.g., checking responses of an HTTP request. The verification and validation
of REST APIs with black-box technique are mainly driven by exploiting the API specification and
returned responses. Based on the results of this survey (see Table 5), 73% of the existing approaches
are in the context of black-box testing.
Regarding the black-box fuzzers, bBOXRT [108] aims at testing of REST APIs in terms of its
robustness. EvoMaster applies search-based techniques by defining fitness function with black-box
heuristics in a black-box mode [51], such as status code coverage and faulty status code (i.e., 500), to
generate tests. There are also a set of property-based testing approaches that identify properties of
REST APIs as test oracle problems, such as QuickRest [103] and Schemathesis [100]. For instance,
in terms of the API specification, QuickRest and Schemathesis both identify consistency with
the specification as the properties. Schemathesis also explores semantic properties of REST APIs,
such as GET should fail after an unsuccessful POST when they perform on the same resource. Moreover,
dependencies of REST APIs are studied for REST API testing. For instance, RESTler [59] infers
and handles dependency among endpoints to generate effective tests based on the API specification
and runtime returned responses. RESTest generates tests by exploring inter-parameter dependencies
of REST APIs. With RestTestGen [82, 154], Operation Dependency Graph is proposed to capture
data dependencies among operations of a REST API. The graph is initially built based on its OpenAPI
schema then further extended at runtime. Morest [113] formalized a property graph to construct
relations of operations and object schema, and such a graph could be derived based on the API schema
then dynamically updated based on responses at runtime. Within a specified time budget, test cases
could be initially generated by traversing the graph, and any update of the graph would result in
new tests. Furthermore, RestCT [160] is a combinational approach, integrating two phases that
facilitate generating orders of operations then concertizing input parameters of operations. The orders
are generated based on HTTP action semantics with greedy algorithm, e.g., for a specific resource, its
GET operation should not appear before its POST and after its DELETE. The concrete values of input
parameters could be produced in various ways, such as random, previous responses, specified examples
or inter-parameter dependencies. In the context of black-box testing, Cheh and Chen [77] enabled
a semi-automatic approach to identify security issues in the API schema. Navas [130] proposed an
approach to infer and validate the API schema, such as misnamed and duplicated elements in response
schema.
Compared to black-box testing, white-box techniques could enable testing of internal behaviors of
the REST APIs with additional metrics relating to source code, such as code coverage. For example,
Pythia [58] employs code coverage heuristics to guide test generation. The code coverage could
be collected by pre-configuring locations of basic blocks in its implementation with static analysis.
EvoMaster is a fuzzer which has a white-box mode, and the white-box testing is enabled by code
instrumentation for JVM [50, 49] and NodeJS programs [168] developed in the fuzzer. The code
instrumentation allows to identify the code to cover and collect code coverage at runtime. With such
info, EvoMaster defined white-box heuristics and applied search-based techniques to fuzzing REST
APIs. With this SLR, we found that all other white-box testing techniques are built on the top of
EvoMaster platform (i.e., [170, 139, 146, 50, 169, 148, 165, 53, 166, 155, 47]) with new algorithms
and new techniques.
There also exist hybrid approaches which combine black-box and white-box [121]. For instance,
Martin-Lopez et al. [121] proposed a solution by integrating two fuzzers (i.e., RESTest and EvoMaster). A motivation of having such a hybrid approach as described in the paper is that inputs of a
REST API are restricted with constraints, and the constraints are not specified in the API schema.
Without the info of constraints, generating successful requests (i.e., receiving a response with 2xx
status) is not trivial. However, white-box testing approach could tackle this problem by identifying
the constraints with source code, such as EvoMaster [55, 54]. In [121], RESTest is firstly employed
to generate tests in the context of black-box testing, then the generated tests would be regarded as
seeds that EvoMaster starts with. With the four selected REST APIs, the hybrid approach achieved
the best results compared to isolated black-box and white-box solutions.
6.2.2

Search-based Testing

Search-based testing aims at solving software testing problems with metaheuristic search techniques,
such as Genetic Algorithms and Swarm Algorithms. In order to enable the search techniques, it needs
to reformulate the addressed testing problem as a search problem.
EvoMaster is a search-based fuzzer that reformulates test case generation as search problems
supporting both black-box and white-box mode. The black-box mode is achieved with Random strategies
with black-box heuristics, such as coverage of operations and status code. The white-box mode is
enabled with novel techniques (e.g., code instrumentation [50], testability transformations [55, 54] and
SQL handling [52, 53]) which allows to define white-box heuristics as part of fitness function. For
instance, code instrumentation enables identification of lines and branches to cover as testing targets
and collecting such coverage at runtime, and testability transformations provide better guidelines
to search for maximizing the testing targets. Many independent objectives algorithm (MIO) is the
default algorithm in white-box mode of EvoMaster. MIO is an evolutionary algorithm developed
specific to white-box system test generation, and the algorithm is inspired by (1+1)EA [85] that
contains sampling and mutation operators. Its effectiveness to test REST APIs has been demonstrated
in several papers [49, 50, 56]. To be specialized for Web API testing and REST API domain,
MIO is further extended with adaptive hypermutation [165], smart sampling [50] and resource-based
techniques [170, 169].
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) were also enabled for REST API testing. For instance, the Whole
Test Suite [92] employed genetic algorithm to enable automated test suite generation. With the
GA, the approach evolved the test generation with mutation and crossover operators, and the fitness
function is defined with an overall single objective using white-box heuristics. Instead of single-objective
optimization, Many-Objective Sorting Algorithm (MOSA) extends NSGA-II [84] for handling test
generations with respects to maximizing many testing targets as many-objective optimization. WTS
and MOSA have been integrated into EvoMaster which allows to apply them to tackle REST
API testing [49]. With the EvoMaster platform, Stallenberg et al. [146] employed Agglomerative
Hierarchical Clustering (AHC) to identify patterns of tests, then extended MOSA (named LT-MOSA)
to generate tests with the patterns. Aside from test generation, Liu and Chen [111] employed genetic
algorithm to optimize test data of REST APIs in the context of mutation testing.
Moreover, Swarm Algorithms were also investigated. Sahin [139] proposed a Discrete Dynamic
Artificial Bee Colony with Hyper-Scout (DABC-HS) algorithm which was introduced to address
shortcomings of a basic Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) for REST API testing. Furthermore, a Greedy
Algorithm was applied in RestCT to produce operation sequences [160].
6.2.3

Property-based Testing

Property-based testing is an approach which validates and verifies the SUT based on identified
properties that should always abide by the SUT. In the context of REST API testing, one type of
properties could be identified based on schema, such as check if the responses during testing conform
to the schema [103, 100]. In addition, as REST, it defines a set of guidelines on how to access resources.
Then, states of resources in REST API are captured as properties of REST APIs. For instance,
QuickRest [103] defined stateful properties of REST API with documented responses for producing a
stateful sequence of operations. Seijas et al. [107] generates finite state machines to construct changes
of states of resources, then employed Quviq QuickCheck for enabling property-based testing of REST
APIs. Chakrabarti and Rodriquez [76] examined connectedness of resources in testing REST APIs.
There also exist some work for exploring semantic of REST APIs. For instance, in Schemathesis,
Hatfield-Dodds and Dygalo [100] derived structural and semantic properties of REST APIs relating to
constraints, security and performances. Metamorphic testing was also enabled in REST API testing
that identified metamorphic relations of the REST API based on their semantics [141, 117, 114].
6.2.4

Model-based Testing

Model-based testing is to employ models to perform testing. The models are typically constructed
manually before the testing for depicting the SUT, such as states, behaviors. For instance, Vu et
al. [157, 155, 156] proposed a model-based testing approach which uses an ε-NFA to construct
hypermedia behavior of the REST API. Fertig and Braun [89] developed a Domain Specific Language
(DSL) for constructing models of REST APIs, then defined a set of test templates for test generations
with such models.
In [112], Liu et al. proposed a model-based approach for verifying REST service architecture
using colored Petri Nets (CPN). Five REST feature constraints are defined with CPN models. Such
constraint models allow a verification of architecture models using simulation. Pinheiro et al. [137]
constructed behaviors of REST API with UML state machines.
Moreover, the models could also be used to construct the tests. Ed-douibi et al. [86] defined a
metamodel for formalizing test suites of REST APIs. In the approach, the authors proposed a set of
rules (e.g., infer parameter values based on examples, generate faulty test cases with invalid inputs) to
generate the test suite model based on the OpenAPI. Then the generated test suite model is further
converted to execute code (e.g., JUnit) for performing the requests against the SUT.
6.2.5

Others

Graphs were constructed in several works for capturing structures and relationships of REST APIs.
Then, for example Breadth-First Search (BFS) can be employed for generating tests based on such
graph [59].
Gazzola et al. [95] proposed an approach ExVivoMicroTest which facilitates regression test
generation by recording service interactions at runtime. Godefroid et al. [98] proposed an approach for
detecting faults due to changes made among different versions of RESTful web services. Such faults
could be identified by comparing behavior of different versions with the same inputs generated by a
fuzzer RESTler.
Takeda et al. [148] developed test case extraction approach which aims at identifying impacts of
migration of APIs to microservices from monolithic architecture. The impacts are derived by analyzing
source code in the context of white-box testing.
RQ5: Both white-box and black-box techniques were investigated for tackling testing of REST API,
and most of existing approaches (i.e., 73%) are black-box. With black-box testing, property-based and
model-based testing were widely employed that identify characteristics of the REST APIs (such as
properties and behavior) to facilitate automated testing. White-box testing of REST APIs was
mainly addressed by search-based techniques.

6.3

RQ6: What kind of testing has been automated for RESTful APIs?

To find out what kinds of testing have been conducted by the papers and what are their frequencies,
we extracted relevant data and analyzed them. The results of our findings are shown in Table 6. Not
all the papers necessarily conduct only one testing type and they might cover more than one of them
(e.g., unit testing, integration testing and acceptance testing are covered by [68]). With this SLR, we
discovered 8 testing types in the context of REST API testing which had been investigated by the
papers. More details about these types are discussed as follows:
• System Testing
System testing is a type of testing that verifies a software product’s integration and completion.
A system test’s objective is to gauge how well the system requirements are met from beginning
to end. Most of the papers (i.e., 72 out of 92) we found are either focusing solely on this type
(e.g., [129]) or are conducting it along with other types. As the REST is a guideline to build the
web services and current techniques (e.g., OpenAPI) enables necessary info to perform system
testing (e.g., make the request to REST API), it is expected that the system testing is the most
addressed problem in REST API testing.
• Security Testing
The fundamental objective of security testing is to determine the system’s risks and assess any
potential vulnerabilities, so that threats can be confronted and the system can continue to operate
without being compromised. As an example, the study by Cheh and Chen uses the standardized
OpenAPI specification as an input and suggests a semi-automatic method to deduce different
significant details regarding the security flaws in that API definition [77]. Security testing of
REST APIs is of great importance. As it is mentioned in Section 1, many large enterprises rely
on REST APIs. However, there have reportedly been a number of incidents involving web API
security in recent years. The top three were denial of service attacks (19%), bot/scraping (20%),
and vulnerabilities (54%) followed by authentication problems (46%). These flaws continue to
exist until a hacker finds and takes advantage of them, which can lead to data loss, account
abuse, or service interruption [45].
• Integration Testing
This stage examines whether collections of components function as expected by the technical
system design or specification. We found some papers focusing on this kind of testing, such as
the study by Vu et al. [155] which is aimed at automation of integration testing with the focus
on hypermedia testing.
• Unit Testing
Unit testing is the process of testing a single units, small specialized section of code written by a
developer. MockRest [143] is one tool focusing on unit testing by proposing a mock framework
to help developers get a consistent response while the real REST API is down.
Table 6: Different testing types and their frequencies among the papers
Testing Type

#

Papers

System
Security
Integration
Unit
Robustness
Regression
Architecture
Acceptance
8
3
1
[82, 62, 170, 139, 108, 51, 121, 129, 80, 146, 126, 151,
119, 105, 103, 154, 97, 171, 157, 59, 69, 50, 124, 169, 86,
141, 89, 107, 76, 75, 81, 148, 165, 53, 167, 150, 73, 160,
106, 166, 137, 110, 55, 118, 149, 120, 134, 100, 122, 67,
161, 113, 58, 79, 65, 162, 115, 54, 52, 102, 57, 159, 117,
47, 61, 111, 130, 114, 125, 156, 123, 168]
[60, 104, 128, 63, 77, 163, 71, 101]
[157, 158, 152, 153, 155, 144, 68, 145]
[148, 143, 144, 68, 145]
[82, 108, 154]
[98, 95]
[112]
[68]

• Regression Testing
Regression testing is the process of ensuring that altered software continues to function as
intended [88]. For example, in order to automatically find breaking changes across API versions,
differential regression testing for REST APIs is presented in [98]. In this study, 2 papers tackle
specific regression testing problems for REST API. Moreover, test cases produced by a fuzzer
could also be used for regression testing. For example, EvoMaster automates system testing
but the test cases generated by this tool can be used for conducting regression testing.
• Robustness Testing
Robustness testing aims to identify the extent to which a particular system or component can
continue to operate properly in the presence of erroneous inputs or demanding environmental
circumstances [19]. Fuzzers that aim at finding faults in the APIs might send invalid inputs on
purpose to check if the API correctly returns an error message. One work focusing on robustness
testing is [108], which performed this type of test over REST services based on the constraint
information expressed in their OpenAPI specification.
• Architecture Design Testing
The only paper which we found conducting this kind of testing is the study by Liu et al. [112].
This paper is aimed at enhancing system design’s quality by verifying whether an API conforms
to the REST architecture constraints described in Section 2.1.
• Acceptance Testing
Acceptance testing is a formal testing procedure used to ascertain whether a system satisfies its
acceptance criteria and to give the client the option of accepting the system or not. The study
by Besso et al. is the only paper which covers this type of testing by conducting it against web
service choreographies [68].
As it is shown in Table 6, the frequency of papers which focus on system testing was much higher
than those papers that necessarily require accessing to software components (e.g., integration test) or
source code (e.g., unit test). As mentioned in Section 2.1, REST is a high-level design guideline, so it
is understandable that most of the papers (i.e., 72) were focusing on system testing which is performed
to determine a complete software system is working properly.
RQ6: Existing studies in REST API testing covered 8 different testing types. Most of the studies
(i.e., 72 out of 92) referred to system testing of REST API.
50
30
10
13
Internet

Local

No Case Studies

Both
24

Figure 7: Location of Case Studies Used for Empirical Evaluations and Their Frequencies

6.4

RQ7: What kind of artifacts are used for conducting empirical evaluations?

In this section, we investigated what kind of artifacts researchers have used as case studies to
empirically evaluate the effectiveness of their proposed approaches. Sound empirical evidence is needed
to demonstrate the usefulness of a novel technique. The larger and more variegated a case study is,
the more likely it will be that results would generalize to other systems.
The results of our findings, including different categories of case studies and their frequency among
the papers are displayed in Figure 7. When dealing with experiments on testing Web APIs, there are
two main types of artifacts: (1) APIs run on a local machine; and (2) existing APIs available on the
internet (e.g., ProgrammableWeb [27] currently lists more than 20 000 APIs).
For the former type (i.e., APIs run on a local machine), those are typically open-source projects,
hosted on open-source repositories such as GitHub. Local open-source project is the most common type
of case studies used by 30% of the papers. For instance, case studies from EMB repository17 which
includes a set of open source APIs are utilized by 17 papers as case study [170, 139, 51, 146, 50, 124,
169, 165, 53, 167, 166, 55, 118, 162, 54, 52, 168]. There are cases in which local closed-source APIs are
used for this kind of experiments, but it is a less common occurrence (i.e.,7%), as it typically requires
academia-industry collaborations on joined research projects [93]. There are also papers which take
advantage of both open-source and closed-source APIs by running them locally. This group consists of
4% of the papers. In addition, several cases are witnessed in which some artificial example APIs are
built by researchers to conduct empirical studies. These artificial artifacts are utilized by 16% of the
papers.
The latter type, which include 28% of the case studies, are typically industrial APIs providing paid
services on internet, or free services from different government agencies. Some might be open-source, but
those are a small minority. On this kind of APIs, typically only black-box techniques are investigated,
as white-box techniques require access to the source code. For example, RestTestGen [82, 154]
used 87 RESTful APIs available on internet for its empirical studies. However, one major drawback
of using APIs on the internet is that experiments might not be repeatable, as APIs on the internet
might change or disappear without any previous notice. There is also the case of [130], which uses
case studies hosted on the internet along with artifacts developed by the researchers.
https://github.com/EMResearch/EMB
Finally, there are a considerable number of papers which did not perform any empirical evaluations.
14% of papers, such as the 4 papers which their main contribution is of type ‘‘Proposal or idea’’ did
not conduct any empirical evaluations. There are also papers which are not of type ‘‘Proposal or idea’’,
but did not make use of any case studies for empirical evaluations, such as the study by Pinheiro et
al. [137].
RQ7: The most common group of case studies are local open-source projetcs and APIs on the
Internet which are used by 30% and 28% of the papers, respectively. We also discovered that 14% of
the papers do not use any case studies.
Tools for Testing RESTful APIs

7.1

RQ8: Which research tools are open-source?

Table 7: Information of open-source research tools have been developed for REST API testing

Tool

Website

#

Papers

Programming Language(s)
EvoMaster

[8]
Java, Kotlin, C#, TypeScript, Javascrip
RESTest

[33]
3

Restler

[34]
4
6
8
10
12
14
16

RestTestGen
bBOXRT
Schemathesis
RestCT
Jsongen
RESTApiTester
DeepLearningBasedTool
Api Tester
Restats
Gadolinium
Hsuan-Fuzz
Instance Identification
ExVivoMicroTest

[35]
[4]
[36]
[32]
[22]
[29]
[7]
[2]
[31]
[14]
[18]
[20]
[10]
4
2
1
1
1
1
[170, 139, 51, 121, 146, 50,
169, 165, 53, 167, 106, 166,
55, 118, 54, 52, 57, 47, 168]
[121, 80, 126, 167, 150, 106,
120, 125]
[80, 60, 97, 59, 98, 167, 106,
65]
[82, 80, 154, 167, 106]
[108, 80, 167, 106]
[167, 106, 100]
[167, 160]
[67, 61]
[62]
[129]
[86]
[81]
[73]
[149]
[152]
[95]

Java
Python, F#
Java
Java
Python
Python
Erlang
Java
Python
Java
Python
TypeScript, JavaScript
Go
Go
Python

Typically, a scientific article does not have the space to fully describe in details all the low level
details of a new presented technique. Releasing the implementation of a new research prototype as
open-source not only helps in this aspect, but it is also helpful to enable replicated studies (as reimplementing everything from just an article description can be a major engineering task). Furthermore,
open-source tools, if maintained and properly engineered, can be used by practitioners to reduce the
gap between academic research and industrial practice.
Studies that have their tool released as open-source, or use existing open-source tools for comparisons,
are listed in Table 7, along with the programming language(s) the tools are implemented with. Note
that, in some cases, studies extend on existing open-source tools, but no info is provided on whether
the extension is available as open-source. Also, it might happen that a tool is released as open-source
only after a scientific article is published. We have included these cases as well, but due to the lack
of precise information (e.g., URL links might not be explicitly stated in the articles) we might have
missed some.
Overall, it can be observed that 16 tools have either been compared or released by 44 papers.
EvoMaster is the one which the highest number of papers. 19 papers are either presenting it or
proposing a new technique which is integrated into it or using it for comparison with other tools. The
second most common tools are RESTest and RESTler, used in 8 papers.
It can be seen that Java and Python have been the most common programming languages, used by
6 open-source tools each.
RQ8: 16 research tools have been released as open-source based on research outcomes of REST
API testing. EvoMaster is the most used tool which have been studied, extended and compared
with other tools, and RESTest and RESTler are the second most ones. Java and Python are the
most applied programming language for developing the research tools.

7.2

RQ9: Which non-research tools are used/compared?

REST APIs are widely used in industry, and their testing is a concrete issue that needs to be addressed,
as it has practical value. Therefore, besides the work from the research community, it is not surprising
to see effort from engineers and practitioners in industry to address this problem. Our goal here is not
to survey all the non-research work done on the topic, but rather to analyze what academics found
important and relevant enough to cite and use in their studies. Note that, with the term ‘‘non-research’’
we loosely mean all the software tools and libraries developed by practitioners in industry, without any
published scientific article (as far as we know) describing them.
The aim of this research question is to find out what are the non-research tools and libraries that
have been used in our surveyed studies. Those should be either specific to test REST APIs (e.g.,
API fuzzers), or can be used for testing REST APIs (e.g., code coverage tools). The tools we found
are listed in Table 8. We found a larger number of non-research tools being used or compared in
the papers, but they all were not relevant to software testing or REST APIs domains. For example,
WSFuzzer 18 is a tool used by one of the papers [115], but it is aiming at SOAP APIs, as the paper
covers this type of APIs as well. With this SLR, we found two kinds of non-research tools have been
used in REST API testing, i.e., library, and toolkit.
There exist two libraries which have been used in testing of REST API. Being utilized by 12
papers, RestAssured [30] is the most used non-research tool which facilitates doing HTTP calls against
REST API and validating responses. RestAssured is mainly applied in tests generated by fuzzers, such
as EvoMaster [50] and RESTest [121]. Swagger Schema Validator [41] is another library which
validates JSON objects against Swagger 2 which is utilized by response validation oracle to assess the
automated test case generation [82].
There are variety of toolkit for testing of REST API. For instance, Postman[26] is a platform for
building and testing APIs, such as test execution and result validation. For REST API testing, tests
can be specified as Postman format, and such tests can be created manually or automatically by fuzzers.
For instance, EvoMaster supports Postman tests as seed for automated test case generation [121].
Fuzz-lightyear [11] is a framework for stateful fuzzing. It maintains the state between requests, allowing
us to put together a request sequence, design it to simulate a malicious attack vector, and use it to
notify of unexpected success. Go-fuzz [15] is also a framework to enable fuzzing in applications written
in Go language. Burp Suite [5] is a commercial fuzzer for security testing that is utilized by 2 papers.
TnT-Fuzzer [43] is an open-source tool for testing robustness which is taken advantage of for evaluation
by 2 papers [100, 79]. SoapUI [37] is an application to perform automated end-to-end tests on a variety
of web-services, including REST APIs to test their performance and security. Tcases [42] is another
tool that performs black-box model-based testing based on OpenAPI specifications. SpotBugs [38] is a
tool which enables static analysis of codes written in Java. Dredd [23] is an API testing tool which
conducts sample-value-based testing technique and validates responses based on status codes, headers
and body payloads. Autorize [3] is another tool focusing on security which detects authorization
enforcement within a REST API. ZAP [44] is a web application scanner tool focusing on security testing
by performing penetration testing. Rest of the tools are fuzzers which depend on OpenAPI/Swagger
schema.
RQ9: 20 non-research tools were identified from the selected 92 papers for REST API testing, in
which RestAssured was the most used/compared by 12 papers.
https://sourceforge.net/projects/wsfuzzer/
Table 8: Information of non research tools which have been applied in REST API testing
Tool

Website

Description

#

Papers
RestAssured

[30]

DSL for writing tests in Java
2

[41]

Validates JSON objects against Swagger 2
3
5
7

Swagger Schema Validator
Postman
Burp Suite
SoapUI
APIFuzzer
Fuzz-lightyear

[121, 126, 50,
165, 53, 55, 54,
52, 71, 47, 125,
168]
[82, 154]

[26]
[5]
[37]
[1]
[11]
2
2
[121, 126]
[81, 79]
[73, 130]
[106, 100]
[63, 100]
9
TnT-Fuzzer
SpotBugs
Dredd

[43]
[38]
[23]
1
[100, 79]
[108]
[106]
Tcases

[42]
[106]
Autorize

[3]
[63]
14
Go-fuzz
Got-Swag
Cats

[15]
[16]
[6]
1
[149]
[100]
[100]
17
19
Swagger-conform
Fuzzy-swagger
Swagger Fuzzer
Fuzzapi
ZAP

[39]
[13]
[40]
[12]
[44]

Client tool for testing APIs manually
Commercial security testing fuzzer
Web-service testing application
Fuzzer tool based on OpenAPI
Stateful fuzzing framework based on OpenAPI
Open-source robustness testing tool
Static analysis tool for Java code
Validates responses based on status codes,
headers, and body payloads
Black-box model-based testing based on OpenAPI
Authorization enforcement detection tool (Extension for Burp Suite)
Randomized testing for Go
Monkey testing for APIs based on Swagger
Fuzzer and negative testing tool based on
OpenAPI
Tests if API conforms to Swagger schema
Fuzzer based on Swagger
Fuzzer based on Swagger
Open-source general-purpose HTTP fuzzer
Penetration Testing Tool For Web Apps
1
1
[100]
[100]
[100]
[79]
[115]

7.3

RQ10: Which features are supported by the research prototypes?

To get better understanding of the current state-of-the-art, we investigated what features are supported
by the research prototypes. This can also help practitioners to evaluate these prototypes. To answer
this research question, we collected features supported by the 16 open source tools which we identified
(see Section 7.1). Based on the collected features, we then divided them into five main categories as
shown in Table 9. The identification of features is based on what reported in the published papers of
these tools, and their online documentation (if any is available). At times, the needed information is
either unclear of missing. For example, a tool could state that it generates ‘‘test cases’’, but no info
seems provided on the language and format of these output test cases in the documentation.
OpenAPI is supported by most of the tools (i.e., 12 out of 16) as a supported format of REST API
schema. The tools take the OpenAPI specification as an input to identify endpoints of the REST API.
It has also been taken advantage of alongside other information such as HTTP logs in Restats and
visualized data (i.e., charts) in Gadolinium [73].
Regarding what the released prototypes output, test cases are the most common one and among
them, JUnit is the most employed one. Since EvoMaster supports other programming languages
(i.e., C# and Javascript) it also supports tests written in these languages (e.g., xUnit and Jest).
The capability to test REST APIs which needs the client to be authenticated/authorized is a
challenge that is handled by 8 of the tools. Another supported feature is clearing the database after
each test run which resets the database state. This feature is of great importance, as each test case
has to be independent from each other. This feature is only supported by EvoMaster. EvoMaster
is also the only tool which supports Automated Code Instrumentation as it conducts white-box testing
and needs to insert probes into the source code of the SUT to collect code coverage during test case
generation.
The features we detected are not only limited to Table 9. For example, installers for different
operating systems are available for EvoMaster. As another example, RESTest enables user to
modify operations under test. In other words, it is allowed to exclude some endpoints from being
tested.
Table 9: Features which have been supported by open-source research prototypes

Item

#

Tool(s)

Input
OpenAPI
I/O Traces
API Call
Path dependencies
JSON schema
1
1

RestTestGen, RESTApiTester, EvoMaster, bBOXRT, RESTest,
Restler, Api Tester, Restats, Gadolinium, RestCT, Hsuan-Fuzz,
Schemathesis
Restats, ExVivoMicroTest
DeepLearningBasedTool
Hsuan-Fuzz
Jsongen

Output
JUnit test case
Unspecified test case
Python test case
xUnit test case
Jest test case
Validity of API call
Test coverage metrics
Test coverage level
OpenAPI
Visualized data (charts)
Test results (statistics.csv and Swagger)
QuickCheck generator
4
1
1
1
1
1

RestTestGen, EvoMaster, RESTest, Api Tester
RESTApiTester, bBOXRT, Restler, Hsuan-Fuzz
Schemathesis, ExVivoMicroTest
EvoMaster
EvoMaster
DeepLearningBasedTool
Restats
Restats
Gadolinium
Gadolinium
RestCT
Jsongen
RestTestGen, EvoMaster, RESTest, Restler, Api Tester, HsuanFuzz, Instance Identification, Jsongen
EvoMaster
EvoMaster

Authentication Support

Database Reset Support
Automated Code Instrumentation

RQ10: There are a variety of features supported by the released prototypes.We listed them based on
five categories. OpenAPI schema as inputs and JUnit test cases as outputs have been the most
common ones.
Research Challenges

In this section, we discuss challenges presented in existing studies of REST API testing. These could
be addressed challenges that have been posed by the research questions in the papers (RQ11), or issues
that are still open for future work (RQ12).

8.1

RQ11: Which research challenges are addressed?

We studied the papers to infer the main challenge(s) they have addressed. Then, we wrote them down,
grouped them and searched for the most common ones, which appear in at least more than one article.
Most articles deal with presenting a novel technique (usually a fuzzer) aiming at fault finding. Here,
however, we rather discuss work that focuses on specific identified challenges of testing REST APIs,
and not their testing in general. This can provide a better understanding of different specific aspects
of testing REST APIs.
In Table 10, we have included the research challenges which have been addressed by at least one
paper. Handling resource dependency was the most repeated research challenge among the analyzed
Table 10: Common research challenges addressed by the papers
Challenge

#

Papers

Handling resource dependencies
Inferring inter-parameter dependencies
Oracle problem
Handling database
White-box heuristics
Mocking
Defining coverage criteria
Instance identification
6
3
2
2

[170, 146, 59, 169, 76, 158, 110, 113]
[160, 120, 122, 79, 125, 123]
[60, 141, 63, 117, 114]
[53, 166, 52]
[55, 54, 168]
[69, 143]
[124, 81]
[152, 153]

articles, focused on in 8 articles. This challenge refers to dependencies among resources as they typically
exist in the SUTs, and dependency identification is used to detect such dependencies based on REST
API Schema, Accessed SQL Tables and Fitness Feedback [170]. For example, Stallenberg et al. [146]
have formed a model which captures, replicates and preserves dependency patterns of API calls in new
test cases as breaking them could impede the effectiveness of the test case generation process.
Inferring inter-parameter dependencies was the second most frequent addressed challenge (examined
in 6 articles). It refers to the restrictions that web services frequently impose on how two or more
input parameters can be combined to create valid calls to the service. It is frequent that the use of one
parameter necessitates or impedes the use of another parameter or set of parameters. For example,
[122] has introduced a domain-specific language for the formal specification of dependencies, called
Inter-parameter Dependency Language (IDL), and a tool suite for the automated analysis of IDL.
Another common challenge is Oracle problem. Fuzzers can identify faults based on 500 HTTP
status code, and mismatches of the responses with the given API schema. Research has been carried
out to define further automated oracles to be able to detect more faults. This could be based on
security rules (e.g., [60, 63]), or metamorphic relations. When a test execution’s expected outcome
is complex or unclear, metamorphic testing offers a solution that solves the oracle problem [78, 140].
Instead of examining the results of a single program execution, metamorphic testing examines whether
many instances of the program being tested satisfy particular requirements known as metamorphic
relations. For example, take into account the following metamorphic relation in Spotify: regardless of
the size of the pagination, two searches for albums with the same query should return the same number
of total results [141].
The rest of challenges shown in Table 10 are less common, as they were addressed by two-three
articles each. Handling Databases is a challenge which was addressed as it has proven that taking
database’s state into account when generating tests will result in higher code coverage and finding new
faults [53, 52].
White-box heuristics aim at improving code coverage results. For example, a common issue in
SBST is the flag problem [64], where the branch distance is not able to provide any gradient. To solve
this problem, one method is to use so-called Testability Transformations to change the SUT’s source
code in a way that enhances the fitness function [99]. These techniques can be used also to derive
specific information for REST APIs, for example detecting the use of query parameters not specified in
the OpenAPI schema. The papers which have addressed this issue such as [55, 54] transform the code
of SUT to improve the fitness function during the search.
Mocking is another addressed challenge by two of the papers [69, 143] which is aimed at providing
reliable response for the services that might not be accessible or down temporarily. Instance Identification is a problem in the context of micro-service testing that software testers face as they might
not know which concrete instance of service is being invoked. Vassiliou-Gioles has suggested adding a
micro-service instance identification (IID) header field to HTTP requests and responses in order to
make them more testable [152, 153].
How to measure the effectiveness of black-box test generators is a challenge addressed in [124, 81],
where new black-box criteria besides counting detected faults have been defined (i.e., Defining coverage
criteria). This is particularly important when testing remote APIs for which code coverage metrics
cannot be used.
RQ11: The most common addressed challenges include handling resource and inter-parameter
dependencies, as well as defining new automated oracles.

8.2

RQ12: Which open research challenges are identified?
Table 11: Common Open Challenges

Challenge

#

Papers

Tool support
Having more REST case-studies
Security testing
Resource handling
Classifying test results
Handling external services
White-box heuristics
Database handling
Automated oracles
Performance testing
Non-functional testing
Load testing
Metamorphic testing
Underspecified schemas
10
4
4
4
2
1
[62, 108, 80, 126, 151, 154, 50, 124, 86, 107, 150, 73, 106, 137, 149,
79, 65, 115, 159, 101, 47, 130, 125, 123, 168]
[170, 121, 129, 60, 154, 59, 124, 169, 165, 166, 71, 112, 114]
[82, 154, 59, 104, 89, 107, 149, 65, 101, 95]
[170, 169, 106, 166]
[108, 51, 80, 149]
[51, 167, 79, 47]
[121, 55, 54, 47]
[50, 53, 52, 47]
[67, 155, 61, 156]
[89, 115, 144]
[126, 125]
[62]
[126]
[167]

Most of the papers we studied have mentioned some left objectives, to be addressed in future work.
Among the selected papers, there were 73 papers which have explicitly mentioned at least one open
challenge for future work. This is usually stated in the Conclusion section of these articles, or in
specific Future Work section. We collected all of these objectives, and identified the most common
challenges among them, as shown in Table 11. Note that, in most cases, a typical challenge is to design
better techniques to obtain better code coverage and fault finding results. Here, we rather focus on
more specific challenges related to testing RESTful APIs.
Based on Table 11, the most common objective left as future work is Tool support that is mentioned
in 25 papers. Research in this domain is based on tool prototypes. Due to the complexity of handling
RESTful APIs, these tools require major engineering effort. An early prototype can provide the base
to experiments with some research ideas, which can already be of use and be publishable. Work is then
left to improve these tools to be able to be applicable on more case studies, and to be more user-friendly
for practitioners. For example, in [86] the authors proposed an approach that supports OpenAPI v2,
and plan to enabling its support for OpenAPI v3 as well. Another example, supporting authentication
is needed to enable testing endpoints which needs the client to be authenticated, which was specified
as needed future work in [154]. In these cases, not all techniques presented in the literature support
authentication, or the full specs of the OpenAPI standard. Still, even with partial support, it is possible
to provide and evaluate novel techniques.
Being mentioned in 13 papers, Having more REST case-studies to apply the new approach to a
higher number of REST APIs for empirical evaluation was the second most frequent open challenge.
This is a general issue related to Threats to External Validity, which applies to most empirical studies
in the software engineering research literature. However, one peculiarity here is on the kind of systems
used for experimentation. On the one hand, APIs on the internet pose few issues, including difficulty
in replicating studies (APIs can change at any time) and inability to collect code coverage metrics. On
the other hand, running APIs on local machines for experimentation has non trivial setup costs, for
example on how to setup databases and user info authentication. It can take a significant amount of
time to find and setup a large number of REST APIs for experimentation. Furthermore, experiments
on system test generation for Web APIs are time consuming, as each test case evaluation requires
to execute HTTP calls over a network. Given a fixed amount of time to run experiment (e.g., a
machine with experiments left running for a week), this reduces the number of APIs that can be used
for experimentation.
Many of the articles discussed in this paper present a new approach for generating test cases that
can find faults, based on functional properties (e.g., API should not return a 500 HTTP status code,
or a response not matching the constraints of the schema). A common line of future work mentioned
in these articles is to extend such work to consider other types of testing, in particular Security testing
(10 papers), as well as others such as Performance testing and Load testing (and other unspecified
Non-functional testing).
The other types of open challenges are mentioned less often, in up to 4 articles. For example, there
are specific properties of REST APIs (e.g., the idempotency of HTTP verbs) that could be used as
Automated oracles to be able to find more faults. Related, it will also be important to properly analyze
the test results (i.e., Classifying test results) to be able to automatically check if the obtained responses
represent actual faults, and classify their importance/criticality.
Regarding Handling external services, it is possible for a RESTful API to rely on communications
with other RESTful APIs. Whether the testing mode is either black box or white box, dealing with
external services makes testing these APIs very difficult. In the black box mode, there would be no
control of the external services. Interactions with these external services would be based on both their
implementation and current status. As a result, the chance of being flaky increases. Handling external
services is a challenge in white-box mode as well. Even if a developer had complete control over all of
those services, it might be difficult to set up and run numerous separate web services (each of which
can utilize its own database) for usage by the SUT during testing.
Another issue is when dealing with Database handling. Databases are very common in RESTful
APIs, and the interactions of the APIs with these databases do impact the level of code coverage
and fault finding the fuzzers can reach. Some basic techniques have been presented to handle SQL
databases, but more needs to be done, especially to handle other kinds of databases, like NoSQL
databases such as MongoDB.
When the content of databases cannot be analyzed (e.g., in black-box testing), it is important
to detect relations between operations, such as the need to create a resource with a POST request
first before being able to test its GET endpoint. Several articles have addressed this issue (e.g., recall
Section 8.1). Still, a major issue regarding Resource handling is how to deal with schemas that do not
follow the guidelines of REST (e.g., resources not structured hierarchically), as it is much harder there
to infer resource relations among the different endpoints.
Based on our review, only one tool supports automated white-box testing of RESTful APIs (i.e.,
EvoMaster). As the achieved code coverage still needs to be improved, several code-level issues have
been identified and categorized, which will need to be addressed to achieve higher code coverage, e.g.,
with new White-box heuristics. One possible venue where white-box heuristics can be useful is to deal
with Underspecified schemas, i.e., when there are constraints on the data and operations of the API,
but those are not specified in the schema.
RQ12: We have identified a variety of open challenges discussed in the analyzed articles. There is
still a lot of research work that is needed to be carried out in this domain.
Threats to Validity

As for any survey, there is the validity threat that some important and relevant articles have been
missed from our analysis. We used the most popular search databases to find all relevant articles. As
the results reply on search engine provide by each database and some relevant paper might not be
published in the selected databases, we additionally performed a forward and backward snowballing
procedure to find any other missing articles. In addition, paper selection was done manually, then
human mistakes are possible. To reduce such a risk, three authors were involved in the procedures in
order to reach a final agreement by all, e.g., only papers that all of us the three authors agreed on to
exclude were excluded. However, there is always the possibility that other researchers might have
come to some different selections.
Extracting data from the articles required manual effort and expertise, and it might be prone to
human mistakes. To reduce such validity threat, each selected paper was checked by at least two of us
authors. We are the authors of 16 articles out of the 92 in our survey. Although we are confident
that we were able to properly analyze our own work, there is always the risk that we might have
misunderstood the text of some articles written by other researchers.
Conclusion

In this survey, we have collected and analyzed 92 articles on the topic of testing RESTful APIs. For
this analysis, we can see that there has been an exponential increase in interest on this topic in the
research community, starting from 2017 (Section 5). Many different techniques have been evaluated,
including both black-box and white-box techniques (Section 6). Furthermore, besides scientific articles,
several prototypes have been released as open-source projects, with empirical investigation carried out
on many real-word APIs, finding real faults in them. This shows potential usefulness of this line of
research for practitioners in industry (Section 7). Different scientific challenges have been addressed,
while others still need to be solved (Section 8).
RESTful APIs are widely used in industry. Research work on this topic has strong potential to
have significant impact on industrial practice.
This survey provides a detailed snapshot of the current state-of-the-art in the research literature
on testing RESTful APIs. This is a growing field, where this survey can provide a useful starting point
to drive new research directions on this important topic.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (EAST project, grant agreement No. 864972).