A Mapping of Assurance Techniques for Learning Enabled
Autonomous Systems to the Systems Engineering Lifecycle

Christian Ellis1 , Maggie Wigness2 , and Lance Fiondella1

Abstract—Learning enabled autonomous systems provide increased capabilities compared to traditional systems. However,
the complexity of and probabilistic nature in the underlying
methods enabling such capabilities present challenges for current
systems engineering processes for assurance, and test, evaluation, verification, and validation (TEVV). This paper provides
a preliminary attempt to map recently developed technical
approaches in the assurance and TEVV of learning enabled
autonomous systems (LEAS) literature to a traditional systems
engineering v-model. This mapping categorizes such techniques
into three main approaches: development, acquisition, and
sustainment. We review the latest techniques to develop safe,
reliable, and resilient learning enabled autonomous systems,
without recommending radical and impractical changes to existing systems engineering processes. By performing this mapping,
we seek to assist acquisition professionals by (i) informing
comprehensive test and evaluation planning, and (ii) objectively
communicating risk to leaders.

I. I NTRODUCTION
It is widely recognized [1] that the complexity and resulting
capabilities of autonomous systems created using machine
learning methods, which we refer to as learning enabled
autonomous systems (LEAS), pose new challenges to systems engineering compared to their traditional counterparts.
Moreover, the inability to translate qualitative assessments
to quantitative metrics which measure system performance
hinder adoption. Such limitations make it difficult to produce
reliable systems, and even harder to assure [2]. Without understanding the capabilities and limitations of existing assurance
techniques, defining safety and performance requirements that
are both clear and testable remains out of reach.
Mature test, evaluation, verification, and validation (TEVV)
methods have been in use for decades to ensure the safety
analysis and acquisition of hardware systems [3], but fewer
TEVV methods for software are available, and even fewer
for software that improves itself through learning [4]. Initial
approaches to autonomous systems use control theory to
physically model the world and its underlying dynamics [5],
while LEAS infer and generalize statistical patterns, which
lead to the achievement of goals from a sample of precollected training data points. However, due to the nature of
the environments where LEAS are fielded and the massive
size of their underlying state spaces, systems will likely
encounter states during operation they have never experienced
before, yet still being required to take action.
1 Christian Ellis is a PhD Student and Lance Fiondella is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, USA. cellis3,

Fig. 1: Recent work in assurance for LEAS is mapped to
relevant stages of the MITRE systems engineering lifecycle [6], into 3 distinct categories—development, acquisition,
and sustainment.

Early work from the autonomy community identified issues
that arise from incorporating learning into autonomous systems [4] including state space explosion, operation in unpredictable environments, emergent behavior, and effective human machine interaction. Assurance methods such as formal
methods [7], or reliability analysis [8] seek to provide either
certain or probabilistic guarantees on system performance.
Formal methods support verification by exhaustively search
and identifying dangerous regions of the state space and
provide techniques to avoid such states. Reliability analysis
supports test and evaluation by quantifying the probability
a system will be operational at a point in time from operational data collected throughout the systems lifecycle. The
aforementioned state space explosion makes formal methods
challenging to scale, and reliability analysis difficult to accurately predict estimates. A different field of research seeks
to develop methods which explicitly consider safety during
the learning and operational stages [9]. Lastly, investments
such as the DARPA Assured Autonomy program1 seeks to
continually assure learning enabled cyber-physical systems
by constructing formal methods that assure correctness at
design time and perform runtime monitoring at operation
time. While this program has advanced the state of the

lfiondella@umassd.edu
2 Maggie Wigness is a researcher at the United States Army Research
Laboratory (ARL).

1 https://www.darpa.mil/program/assured-autonomy

art in formal methods [10] and runtime monitoring [11], a
systematic approach to identify outstanding gaps will remain
unclear unless the community makes explicit and coordinated
efforts to understand how such methods may be incorporated
into the broader systems engineering process.
Our work seeks to communicate recent technical developments in LEAS assurance with a focus on autonomous
vehicles, accompanying recent literature reviews [12] [13], by
mapping such developments to distinct steps of a well known
systems engineering model chosen due to its prevalence,
namely the v-model. Fig. 1 shows the mapping and identifies
three top level lifecycle phases: development, acquisition, and
sustainment. For each top level lifecycle phase, a section of
the paper has been dedicated to outlining recent technical developments and how they contribute to the goals of the phase.
This representation helps identify where the latest methods for
TEVV fit in the broader systems engineering process while
also enabling systematic consideration of potential sources of
defects, faults, and attacks. Note that we use the v-model only
to assist the classification of where TEVV methods fit. This is
not a recommendation to use a certain software development
lifecycle over another.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the specific scientific fields supporting LEAS.
Section III provides an overview of the mapping between traditional systems engineering and the state of the art in assurance for LEAS. Section IV maps assurance techniques, which
assist development to design and development, and system
integration in the systems engineering lifecycle. Section V
maps assurance techniques, which assist acquisition to test
and evaluation. Section VI maps assurance techniques, which
assist sustainment to transition, operation, & maintenance.
Lastly, section VII concludes with areas this mapping can
impact.
II. M ETHODS S UPPORTING THE D EVELOPMENT OF
L EARNING E NABLED AUTONOMOUS S YSTEMS
This section seeks to define the fields of engineering
with significant impact on development of LEAS with a
focus on vehicles and their corresponding challenges for
assurance. In later sections (Sec. IV—VI), solutions to such
challenges are identified and categorized according to where
they reside within the systems engineering lifecycle such as
development, acquisition, or sustainment. Rather than seek to
obtain an exhaustive list of engineering fields, of which there
are many, we first provide an overview of learning enabled
autonomous vehicles and then review two key contributing
fields, including machine learning and reinforcement learning.
While there are other non-learning methods such as optimal
control theory [14], which have made large and long lasting
impacts on the development on LEAS, they are not considered
in this paper.
LEAS normally follow one of two design approaches, endto-end (E2E) or modular. In the E2E approach [15], a system’s
sensors act as the input to a learning algorithm. For example, a
deep neural network outputs the corresponding actions such as

steering wheel angle (lateral control) [16], torque (longitudinal control) [17], or both [18]. In the modular approach [19], a
system’s sensors act as input to a perception sub-system which
is responsible for building a map and model of the world.
Such subsystems commonly include perception components
that use ML techniques such as semantic segmentation [20] or
object detection [21]. This model is then used by a planning
subsystem, which outputs a kinematically feasible trajectory
to which controls are applied [22], [23].
While it may be possible to break down layers of E2E
neural networks into sub-components using interpretability
techniques [24], this paper specifically focuses on the modular
approach for two reasons: i) it is clear to a human what the
responsibility of each component is (increased interpretability), and ii) the modular approach is currently more common
in autonomous vehicle designs in industry and government
implementations. While some of the underlying problems for
assurance are the same for both approaches, including those
previously mentioned [4], we explicitly consider software
assurance methods which are applicable to either perception
or planning components, or the joint-combination thereof.
A. Machine Learning
In machine learning (ML), tasks are completed by training
a model from data to perform function approximation using
a combination of mathematical optimization and statistical
techniques [25]. This results in computer programs which are
able to complete a task without constructing a set of exact
solution instructions ahead of time. There are three main
forms of learning, including supervised, unsupervised, and
reinforcement learning. In supervised learning, each training
sample from the dataset is associated with a set of features and
a corresponding label to train a model. For example, a neural
network can be trained on a dataset of images containing
handwritten digits, where each sample’s corresponding label
is 0 through 9. In unsupervised learning, each training sample
is only represented by a set of extracted features, which are
subsequently used to identify the underlying feature patterns
throughout the dataset. For example, clustering techniques
divide a dataset into k distinct groups, where all data points
in a group are similar with respect to some distance measure.
Finally, in reinforcement learning, an autonomous agent learns
the optimal way to act over time via interaction with the
environment, such as an autonomous robot learning how to
move its actuators and joints to navigate in an environment
without hitting obstacles.
Although the ability to perform complex tasks solely from
data has made ML highly successful, it is for this same
reason that ML models are difficult to assure. Among other
factors, a model’s performance depends on the data experienced during training and the environment in which it was
trained [26]. Naive metrics such as the model’s accuracy
on a test set may be perceived as overconfident because
they assume most future data will be like the experienced
data. This is especially true in complex systems such as
government systems tasked with operating in contested op-

erational environments, demonstrating the need for metrics
to assess model performance in new environments. Another
assurance challenge includes determining relevant test cases
given the state space explosion and curse of dimensionality
problems, of which the Range Adversarial Planning Tool has
been proposed [27]. Furthermore, such models are brittle to
perturbations in input, which may come from sources such as,
sensor noise or adversarial attacks [28]. Lastly, it is inevitable
that such models will fail from time to time, and explanations
of why they fail (interpretability techniques) and how to fail
gracefully (resilience techniques) are also valuable. Although
there are a variety of new assurance techniques [12] [13] that
seek to alleviate such issues, a framework does not exist to
assess their thoroughness and relative effectiveness.
B. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is given a dedicated subsection because it is an enabler of intelligent-like capabilities
required for complex autonomous systems. Reinforcement
learning provides a framework for autonomous agents to make
decisions under uncertainty and learn from environmental
interaction [29]. Specified by a reward function, an agent
seeks to obtain an optimal policy which maximizes its reward
by taking actions over a time horizon in an environment. A
policy is a function that maps the current state to the single
action that maximizes the expected future reward. Formally,
this structure is part of a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
consisting of a state space S, an action space A, a state
transition distribution over next states T (st+1 |st , a), and a
reward function R(s, a, s0 ) whose solution is the optimal
policy which maximizes the expected future reward π ∗ . Exact
RL seeks to converge to the optimal policy using tabular
techniques, requiring an agent to visit each state many times.
Conversely, approximate techniques such as deep RL [30]
allow an agent to operate in large (possibly infinite) state
and action spaces without explicitly visiting each state by
obtaining a parameterized policy.
Although RL has demonstrated its ability to mimic intelligent capabilities such as beating players at Go [31], and
autonomous driving [32], there are limitations. Designing
reward functions explicitly by hand is a challenging task
that can lead to a misalignment between the reward function
specified and the true reward function the algorithm designer
intended [33]. Such value misalignment leads to unintended
consequences such as reward hacking [34], where the robot
maximizes reward in a way that the algorithm designer did
not intend while often failing to meet its goals. Furthermore,
many solutions sample inefficiently and are often brittle [35],
limiting their real world applicability. Lastly, RL can cause
a disconnect between how a programmer may interpret what
an agent has learned and the true learned concept [36]. For
example, a programmer may believe an agent has learned to
traverse to a goal grid cell, but because of the environment
setup, the agent may have actually simply learned to traverse
to a green grid cell. For systems incorporating RL, such limi-

tations and corresponding tests for each should be considered
explicitly in the assurance process.
III. OVERVIEW OF M APPING
This paper provides a preliminary attempt to map recently
developed technical approaches in the assurance and TEVV
of learning enabled autonomous systems (LEAS) literature
to a traditional systems engineering v-model. The mapping
identifies three top level lifecycle phases: development, acquisition, and sustainment. Proceeding according to the colors
in Fig. 1, the stages surrounded in the black box, including
system design & development, and system integration, assist
development and therefore are mapped to methods which
explicitly provide safety assurance during the learning process
(Sec. IV). The stage in the green box, test and evaluation,
assists the acquisition of systems and therefore is mapped to
TEVV analysis techniques which quantify the performance
of an already built system, or component (Sec. V). The stage
in the orange box, transition operation & maintenance, is
mapped to safety assurance techniques which aid sustainment
by monitoring or adapt performance of a fielded system
(Sec. VI). For each stage, applicable classes of techniques
are organized by respective subsections.
In addition to the stage of the system engineering lifecycle,
this mapping also seeks to categorize technical developments
according to their granularity. When evaluating different approaches to the same problem, the choice of performance
metrics depend on the scope of the unit under test—whole
system, learning enabled component, or a traditional component. Interfaces at various lifecycle levels of granularity
promote systems thinking [37] about architecture. Namely, the
way a system’s components and subsystems relate, interact,
and work over time. By understanding the input paths that
contribute to a unit’s decisions, the outputs that may lead to
failures within the larger system become clearer.
Generally speaking, there are two main approaches to assure LEAS—white-box techniques and black-box techniques.
White-box techniques require either a model of the system
under test, or direct access to the source code. In contrast,
black-box techniques only look at the inputs and outputs of
the system under test, and are unaware of the underlying
methods of how the system generates the outputs. Whitebox techniques are better for component level assurance,
while black-box techniques are often better for system-wide
assurance.
The implementation of assurance techniques and their
accompanying metrics to quantify system performance and
safety (Sec. IV—Sec. VI) can all be used as supporting
evidence for a safety assurance case [38] to determine system
readiness level and maturity. Tools which automate traceability and reproducibility throughout the system lifecycle
such as [39] can reduce the burden of collecting evidence.
The appropriate choice of assurance methods and associated
metrics is dependent on the system maturity. Initial project
milestones may focus on demonstrating anti-fragility, while
later milestones may focus on demonstrating the ability to

accomplish a mission and accompanying capabilities. Furthermore, quantitative metrics may only be applicable at
certain levels of system granularity. For example, an entire
system may be best evaluated by the outcomes of a predetermined mission and supporting data, while a learning
enabled component may be better evaluated by measures
specific to machine learning such as uncertainty quantification, robustness to environmental shift, and the ability to fail
gracefully and recover from faults. Metrics which are able
to capture the performance of all approaches under test may
be preferred over metrics that measure the performance of a
certain class of algorithms. Lastly, if performance data can
be collected during the development process, one could also
perform a quantitative analysis of a system at any given time
using traditional reliability [8] and defect removal [40].
IV. A SSURANCE ACTIVITIES TO S UPPORT S YSTEM
D EVELOPMENT
This section maps assurance methods which assist development to system design and development, and system
integration in the systems engineering lifecycle.
A. Artificial Intelligence Safety
AI safety is a sub-field of AI which seeks to ensure that a
deployed AI systems (i) operates as the designer intended
and (ii) completes its task without harming humans. The
importance of AI safety is backed by impactful institutions
such as the Future of Life Institute2 and Machine Intelligence
Research Institute3 . In the academic literature, AI safety
has been popularized by the agenda of Amodedi et al. [9],
who discuss five failure modes for AI; negative side effects,
reward hacking, scalable supervision, safe exploration, and
distributional shift. Moreover, in the context of RL, the
value alignment problem arises due to a gap in the specified
reward function and what the human actually intended [41].
Specifically, Taylor et al. [42] discuss eight different approaches focusing on two areas of value alignment—reward
specification and techniques to avoid side effects. Burden et
al. [43] argue that the scope of AI safety problems residing
in a specific system can be characterized by three quantitative
factors; generality, capability, and control. For a literature
review of AI safety, the reader is directed to [44].
While the works above seek to obtain safer agents by
altering the underlying methodologies, the focus is on agents
in artificial environments rather than physical robots, thereby
creating a gap between theoretical and applied research.
Moreover, most approaches assume that the system is following a RL paradigm, demonstrating the importance to
understand the underlying learning paradigm employed by a
project. Lastly, although AI safety approaches alone will not
be sufficient for LEAS assurance, if the methods are applied
during the learning process, such approaches are likely to
perform and test better than their non-safe counterparts,
leading to higher assurance measures.
2 https://futureoflife.org/
3 https://intelligence.org/

B. Learning from Human Feedback
Incorporating human interaction can positively impact the
performance of a LEAS because it is often easier to provide
feedback on desired behavior rather than explicitly defining it.
This is one solution to the value alignment problem mentioned
in Sec. IV-A. Such human interaction may include learning
from demonstration, intervention, or evaluation [45]. In learning from demonstration [46], the human provides a dataset
of examples mimicking how the system should operate. In
learning from intervention [47], the system operates fully
autonomously and the human takes over as required to correct
system behavior. In learning from human evaluation [48],
[49], the system completes various tasks fully autonomously,
and then a human ranks the tasks. This ranking may be
from best to worst, or answering the yes/no question, “Was
this the behavior you wanted to see the system perform?”
All of the methods mentioned fall into a sub-field known
as imitation learning [50]. Lastly, recent developments in
imitation learning attempt to incorporate safety as part of the
learning process using uncertainty quantification, creating a
new sub field known as safe imitation learning [51], [52].
C. Uncertainty Estimation
System requirements often demand that a learning enabled autonomous system make a prediction, classification,
or decision at every time-step during operation. Since many
implementations contain perception systems that will likely
never be 100% accurate, the certainty or lack thereof, of a
prediction may assist in the final decision made—especially if
the outcome of such a prediction may lead to risky behavior.
The ability for a system to measure what it does and does
not know can be captured by quantifying uncertainty with
Bayesian analysis techniques [53]. There are two main types
of uncertainty, aleatoric and epistemic. Aleatoric uncertainty
measures the variance between samples in a population.
This type of uncertainty cannot be reduced with more data.
An example is the outcome of a fair coin flip. Epistemic
uncertainty measures the lack of knowledge of a population,
which is often captured in a system’s parameters. This type
of uncertainty can be alleviated by collecting more data.
An understanding of the different types of uncertainty helps
system designers understand if performance can be increased
by simply collecting more data. Additional details can be
found in the reviews on uncertainty quantification applied to
machine learning [54], neural networks [55], and computer
vision [56]. Such techniques aid at the learning enabled component level, and can be used to quantify system confidence in
the current operational environment and thereby communicate
uncertainty (risk) to the system end users.
D. Cost-sensitive Learning
At the system level, the impact of a learning enabled
component on the whole system is measured in terms of
its ability to assist in the completion of a task. Additional
failure modes introduced by such components must be explicitly considered. Cost-sensitive learning [57] is applicable

in classification problems where the cost associated with the
misclassification is not equal among classes. For example,
in the context of commercial autonomous vehicles, a false
positive resulting in the vehicle stopping when it did not need
to likely has lower cost than a false negative resulting in a
vehicle colliding with a pedestrian.
E. Formal Methods
Static analysis techniques such as formal methods are able
to provide guarantees on system performance without ever
operating the system [58]. Rather than attempting to discover
faults while the system is placed under operation, claims about
a system are proved or disproved algorithmically using rigorous mathematical methods. Such methods develop a model
of the system being tested, such as a finite-state automaton,
and then test that model against a set of specifications defined
in a formal language. There are two main approaches, formal
verification [7], which checks if a given system satisfies a set
of specifications, while program synthesis seeks to construct a
system from a set of specifications [59]. For a literature review
of formal methods in the context of autonomous robotics, the
reader is directed to [60].
In the context of LEAS, the system is often complex
and safety is critical, thereby making formal methods an
attractive solution. Specifically, synthesis methods provide a
“correct-by-construction” approach [61], where capabilities
and required operating conditions such as safety constraints
are described as specifications and act as input to a synthesis
algorithm which outputs the appropriate system model and
optimal control policy. The vehicle’s actions are thereby guaranteed to stay within the operating conditions determined by
the obtained policy. However, many approaches are currently
limited to static environments, meaning a robot which is
guaranteed to satisfy the specifications in one environment
does not necessarily carry over to other environments. Moreover, many formal methods have issues scaling to large state
spaces [62] due to their exhaustive nature. However, solutions
have been proposed using clever optimization techniques such
as [63] [64]. Nevertheless, synthesis methods can be used
to assure safety during a systems development phase, while
formal verification techniques such as model checking [7]
may be more applicable at the acquirement level.
V. A SSURANCE ACTIVITIES TO S UPPORT S YSTEM
ACQUISITION
This section maps assurance activities to support system
acquisition to test and evaluation in the systems engineering
lifecycle.
A. Autonomy Standards
Standards seek to provide safety assurances, verify capabilities, and promote understanding. Several standards have
been developed to assist the design and development of
commercial autonomous vehicles such as ISO 26262 [65] and
IEC 61508 [66]. Specifically, UL 4600 [67] and ISO/PAS

21448 [68] explicitly consider autonomous vehicle capabilities incorporating learning. UL 4600 employs the idea of
safety assurance cases, where system performance is argued
like a court case given evidence. Minimizing risk is the
goal while also accepting that it cannot be eliminated all together. Military focused standards include ALFUS [69] paired
with the updated ARP6128 [70], and MIL-STD-882E [71].
Most recently, IEEE 2817 [72] (in development) seeks to
standardize verification methods specifically for autonomous
systems. Although this discussion is part of the development
subsection, the standards listed here may also be applicable
to the other two lifecycle categories identified in Figure 1.
B. Software Testing
Capabilities of autonomous systems are enabled by software. There is no debate on the importance of software
testing, when acknowledging the severity of historic software
failures such as the patriot missile or Boeing 737 MAX.
Traditional methods such as those outlined in [73] seek
to partition the input space using graph or logic coverage
to exhaustively test a program. While traditional methods
may work for testing traditional software systems, exhaustive
methods are rendered infeasible due to the state space explosion problem. Moreover, for statistical learning algorithms
commonly applied in machine learning methods, the set of
all possible samples is often much larger than the number
of samples collected. For example, the set of all possible
images a camera may sense using the RGB spectrum with
an image size of 256 × 256 is 16, 777, 216(256∗256) . This
demonstrates the importance of analyzing dataset features
and their associated effectiveness [74] to obtain a generalized
model.
In regards to software engineering—a machine learning
model is similar to traditional components, they both have
inputs and outputs. The difference is the size of the input
space and that the outputs may change on the same input at
different points in time if the model is continually learning.
However, if the model is not learning from new data, it can
be considered as a deterministic component. An inaccurate
prediction from a model can be thought of as equivalent to
a software fault [75]. However, due to the large state space,
the issue remains in the detection of such faults. The next
subsection that follows seek to identify such faults.
C. Automated Test Generation
Automated test case generation seeks to increase the effectiveness of test and evaluation by minimizing testing time,
and identifying the most impactful test cases which are likely
to contain faults. A survey of automatic test-case generation
[76] identifies five main categories—structural testing, modelbased testing, combinatorial testing, random testing, and
search-based testing. Aforementioned for LEAS, the number
of configurations is often intractable and therefore exhaustive
or tree methods are infeasible. Search-based methods seek to
alleviate this issue by using clever optimization techniques,
which identify test cases in areas (boundaries) of a systems

configuration space that are likely to lead to system failure.
Therefore, this subsection focuses on search-based methods.

VI. A SSURANCE ACTIVITIES TO S UPPORT S YSTEM
S USTAINMENT

Most relevant to LEAS, Mullins et al. [27] provide a tool
which automatically identifies test cases for a system under
test with a search based optimization approach dependent on
a set of mission scenario configurations and a performance
score for each configuration. A case study using the aforementioned tool in an autonomous surface vessel domain can
be found in [77]. Bridging the gap between formal verification
and automated test case generation, Akellea et al. [78] provide
a black-box method to identify test cases which do not satisfy
a provided temporal logic specification based on a dataset of
observed demonstrations. Most recently, Badithela et al. [79]
identify test cases for mission objectives by constructing a
set of constraints given a user-defined sequence of waypoints
and a reachability objective. In conclusion, recent research in
search-based automated test generation is able to handle the
state space explosion problem, while also finding the most
impactful test cases. The results from such test cases help
provide impactful evidence towards, or against the construction of safety case (UL 4600).

This section maps assurance activities which support system sustainment to transition, operating, and maintenance in
the systems engineering lifecycle.

D. Metrics for Machine Learning

B. Resilience Engineering

Metrics provide a quantitative analysis of performance,
clearly identifying the best solution out of a set of possible
solutions. Performance is best measured by the system’s ability to accurately make predictions in the current operational
environment which positively contribute to the larger mission
goals. Initial metrics in supervised machine learning focused
on confusion matrices and receiver operating characteristics
(ROC) with metrics such as accuracy, sensitivity, specificity,
precision, and F1 score. For regression models, statistical
measures such as mean absolute error or mean squared error
were sufficient. In the context of neural network regression,
the statistical significance of input features and an accompanying statistical test may be identified [80]. In the reinforcement
learning framework, Chan et al. [81] provide a set of test and
evaluation metrics to statistically measure the variability and
risk of RL algorithms both during and after training.
Agnostic to the task (classification, regression, clustering,
etc.), neuron coverage was introduced [82], as a testing metric
analogous to code coverage [83] for traditional systems. Code
coverage measures the percentage of a code base that has been
covered by tests. High code coverage implies that few software bugs remain, and vice versa. Similarly, neural coverage
measures the percentage neuron activations occur from the
testing dataset, seeking to obtain the same implications of
code coverage. However, recent research [84] [85] has shown
that neuron coverage is an insufficient metric for testing.
Wang et al. [86] seek to address this limitation by quantifying
the value of a test set. Addition metrics research is needed to
quantitatively measure the assurance problems outlined in [4].

A. Runtime Monitoring
Runtime monitoring observes the current state of a system
and determines if the system is satisfying or violating a set
of pre-determined specifications. This is similar to the formal
methods approach outlined in Sec. IV-E. However, runtime
monitoring occurs online (while the system is operating),
whereas most techniques from formal methods occur offline.
Kane et al. introduced EgMon [87], which detects the violation of specifications using propositional metric temporal
logic. Similarly, Zapridou et al. [88] develop an adaptive
cruise control system in the CARLA simulator and perform
runtime monitoring using signal temporal logic. Yel et al. [89]
provide a runtime monitoring technique using neural networks
for safe motion planning. In the U.S. government sector,
a Boeing team as part of the DARPA assured autonomy
program, implemented runtime monitoring in a flight simulator [11]. For an overview of runtime monitoring techniques,
the reader is directed to [90].

Resilience engineering techniques seek to build systems
which remain operational subject to faults and disturbances [91]. Such techniques quantify the impact of degraded
performance and robustness to faults while providing predictions such as the expected time until recovery [92]. In the context of LEAS, resilience techniques can accommodate sensor
inaccuracies which may come from measurement limitations
in the hardware, dust or debris, and adversarial attacks [28].
Resilience monitoring enables a system to recognize that
performance is degraded, and then adapt appropriately, such
as moving from perception based navigation to odometry
based navigation. At the time of writing there is little technical
research on the incorporation of resilience techniques to
LEAS [93], However, [94] offers an initial taxonomy on
resilience for multi-robot systems.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper provides preliminary attempt to map recently
developed technical approaches for the assurance of LEAS
to a traditional systems engineering v-model. By doing so,
we seek to improve the acquisition process by: (i) informing
comprehensive assurance planning, (ii) promoting detailed
analysis of alternatives, and (iii) objectively communicating
risk to leaders. As indicated by the number of references in
each section, most research has been done in the development
of methods which explicitly consider safety assurance, while
further research is needed in methods which aid the acquirement, and sustainment of such systems. Future work seeks
to perform a case study assuring a LEAS using some of the
methodologies referenced in this paper.