© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

A Study on a User-Controlled Radial Tour for Variable Importance
in High-Dimensional Data

Nicholas Spyrison, Dianne Cook, Kim Marriott
Abstract—Principal component analysis is a long-standing go-to method for exploring multivariate data. The principal components
are linear combinations of the original variables, ordered by descending variance. The first few components typically provide a good
visual summary of the data. Tours also make linear projections of the original variables but offer many different views, like examining
the data from different directions. The grand tour shows a smooth sequence of projections as an animation following interpolations
between random target bases. The manual radial tour rotates the selected variable’s contribution into and out of a projection. This
allows the importance of the variable to structure in the projection to be assessed. This work describes a mixed-design user study
evaluating the radial tour’s efficacy compared with principal component analysis and the grand tour. A supervised classification task
is assigned to participants who evaluate variable attribution of the separation between two classes. Their accuracy in assigning the
variable importance is measured across various factors. Data were collected from 108 crowdsourced participants, who performed two
trials with each visual for 648 trials in total. Mixed model regression finds strong evidence that the radial tour results in a large increase
in accuracy over the alternatives. Participants also reported a preference for the radial tour in comparison to the other two methods.
Index Terms—Multivariate data visualization, variable importance, radial tour, linear dimension reduction,
I NTRODUCTION
the magnitude along the radius. The permanence of the data points
from basis to basis holds information between intermediate interpolated
projections, and the user control of the basis could plausibly lead
to more information being perceived than a static display. This is a
hypothesis that a user study could assess.
Empirical studies have rarely assessed tours. An exception is [31],
who compares scatterplots of grand tours on 2D monitors with 3D
(stereoscopic, not head-mounted) over n = 15 participants. Participants perform cluster detection, dimensionality estimation, and radial
sparseness tasks on six-dimensional data. They find that stereoscopic
3D leads to more accuracy in cluster identification, though the time
to interact with the display was much higher in the 3D environment.
In this work, we extend the evaluation of tours which compares the
radial tour as benchmarked against the grand tour and discrete pairs of
principal components.
The contribution of this paper is an empirical user study comparing
the radial tour against PCA and the grand tour for assessing variable
attribution on clustered data. This is the first empirical evaluation of
the radial or manual tour. We discuss how this fits with other multivariate data visualization techniques and coordinated views of linear
projections.
We are particularly interested in assessing the effectiveness of the
new radial tour relative to common practice with PCA and grand tour.
The user influence over a basis, uniquely available in the radial tour, is
crucial to testing variable sensitivity to the structure visible in projection.
If the contribution of a variable is reduced and the feature disappears,
then we say that the variable was sensitive to that structure. For example,
Fig. 1 shows two projections of simulated data. Panel (a) has identified
the separation between the two clusters. The contributions in panel (b)
show no such cluster separation. The former has a large contribution
of V2 in the direction of separation, while it is negligible in the right
frame. Because of this, we say that V2 is sensitive to the separation of
the clusters.
Variable sensitivity is important for the interpretation of machine
learning models. They are the magnitude and direction of contribution
to the model. It is important that developers maintain the interpretability of models. Exploratory Artificial Intelligence (XAI) [1, 3], is an
emerging field that extends the interpretability of such black-box models. Multivariate data visualization is essential for exploring feature
spaces and communicating interpretations of models [5, 6, 47].
The paper is structured as follows. Sect. 2 provides background on
standard visualization methods and linear dimension reduction techniques. Sect. 3 describes the experimental factors, task, and accuracy
measure used. The results of the study are discussed in Sect. 4. Con-

Despite decades of research, multivariate data continues to provide
fascinating challenges for visualization. Data visualization is important because it is a key element of exploratory data analysis [43] for
assessing model assumptions and as a cross-check on numerical summarization [2, 26, 50]. One challenge is measuring if a new technique
yields a more informed perception of information than current practices.
Dimension reduction is commonly used with visualization to provide
informative low-dimensional summaries of quantitative multivariate
data. Principal component analysis (PCA) [34] is one of the first methods ever developed, and it remains very popular. Visualization of PCA
is typically in the form of static scatterplots of a few leading components. When the scatterplot is accompanied by a visual representation
of the basis they are called a biplot [17]. A basis is a p × d matrix
of the linear combination of the p variables mapped to a smaller ddimensional space. That is, it is an orthogonal rotation matrix, the
magnitude, and the angle that the variables contribute.
Dynamic visualizations called tours [4] animate through a sequence
of linear projections (orthonormal bases). Instead of a static view, tours
provide a smoothly changing view by interpolating between bases.
There are various types of tours distinguished by how the paths are
generated. Asimov originally animated between randomly selected
bases in the grand tour. The manual tour [11] allows for user control
over the basis changes. A selected variable (or component) can be
rotated into or out of view or to a particular value. The radial tour [42] is
a variant of the manual tour that fixes the contribution angle and changes

• Monash University
Australia
nicholas.spyrison@monash.edu
ORCiD: 0000-0002-8417-0212.
• Monash University
Australia
dicook@monash.edu
ORCiD: 0000-0002-3813-7155
• Monash University
Australia
kim.marriott@monash.edu
ORCiD: 0000-0002-9813-0377
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx
a

b

V4
V1V2

V1

V4

V2

V3

V3

Cluster

A

B

Fig. 1. Illustration of cluster separation affected by variable importance. Panel (a) is a projection mostly of V2 and V3, and the separation between
clusters is in the direction of V2, not V3. This suggests V2 is important for clustering, but V3 is not. Panel (b) shows a projection of mostly V3 and V4,
with no contribution from V2 and little from V3. That there is no separation between the clusters indicates that V3 and V4 are not important.

clusions and potential future directions are discussed in Sect. 6. More
results, participant demographics, and analysis of the response time are
available in the Supplemental Materials.

introduce linear projections and the common principal component analysis. Then we touch on nonlinear projections and exclude them from
consideration.
2.2.1

R ELATED WORK

Consider the data to be a matrix of n observations (rows) and p variables
(columns), denoted as Xn×p .

Linear

Grinstein [19] illustrates many multivariate visualization methods. In
particular, this work shows examples of actual visuals. Liu [25] give a
good classification and taxonomy of such methods. The content below
focuses on the most common visuals that use the full data space before
discussing linear combinations of those variables in projections.

Let data, X, contain n observations of p variables. A linear projection
maps a higher p-dimensional space onto a smaller d-space with an
affine mapping (where parallel lines stay parallel). A projection, Y ,
is the resulting space of the data multiplied by a basis, A, such that
Yn×d = Xn×p × A p×d . This is essentially a reorientation of the original
variable. This intuition is conveyed by thinking of a shadow as a 2D
projection of a 3D object. Rotating the object changes the shadow it
casts and, correspondingly, the basis that maps the reorientation of the
object.

2.1.1

2.2.2

2.1

Orthogonal multivariate visualization

Scatterplot matrix

One could consider looking at p histograms or univariate densities.
Doing so will miss features in two or more dimensions. Fig. 2 shows
a scatterplot matrix [9] of the four principal components of simulated
data. Such displays do not scale well with dimensions because each
plot would get less and less space. Scatterplot matrices can only display information in two orthogonal dimensions, so features in three
dimensions may not be fully resolved.
2.1.2

Parallel coordinates plot

Another common way to display multivariate data is with a parallel
coordinates plot [32]. Parallel coordinates plots scale well with dimensions but poorly with observations as the lines overcrowd the display.
Parallel coordinate plots are asymmetric across variable ordering. In
that, shuffling the order of the variable can lead to different conclusions. Another shortcoming is the graphical channel used to convey
information. [29] suggests that position is the visual channel that is
most perceptible to humans. In the case of parallel coordinates plots,
the horizontal axes span variables rather than the values of one variable, causing the loss of a display dimension to be used by our most
perceptible visual channel.
2.2

Principal component analysis

PCA is a good baseline of comparison for linear projections because
of its frequent and broad use across disciplines. PCA [34] defines new
components, linear combinations of the original variables, ordered by
decreasing variation through the help of eigenvalue matrix decomposition. While the resulting dimensionality is the same size, the benefit
comes from the ordered nature of the components. The data can be
said to be approximated by the first several components. The exact
number is subjectively selected given the variance contained in each
component, typically guided from a scree plot [8]. Features with sizable signal regularly appear in the leading components that commonly
approximate data. However, this is not always the case and component
spaces should be fully explored to look for signal in components with
less variation. This is especially true for cluster structure [14].
2.2.3

Nonlinear

Nonlinear transformations bend and distort spaces that are not entirely
accurate or faithful to the original variable space. Popular modern
methods include t-SNE and UMAP [28, 44]. There are various quality
metrics, such as Trustworthiness, Continuity, Normalized stress, and
Average local error, have been introduced to describe the distortion of
the space [16, 18]. Unfortunately, these distortions are hard to visualize
and comprehend, effectively breaking the variable interpretability of
the resulting space. The intuition of this can be demonstrated with
map projections. Snyder [41] lists over 200 different projections that

Multivariate projections

At some point, visualization will be forced to turn to dimension reduction to scale better with the dimensionality of the data. Below we
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

PC4

PC3

PC2

PC1

basis and rendered into an animation. When the contribution of one
variable changes, the contributions of the other variables must also
change, to maintain the orthonormality of the basis. A key feature of the
manual tour is that it allows users to control the variable contributions
to the basis. Such manipulations can be queued in advance or selected
in real time for human-in-the-loop analysis [21]. Manual navigation
is relatively time-consuming due to the vast volume of resulting view
space and the abstract method of steering the projection basis. First, it
is advisable to identify a basis of particular interest and then use the
manual tour as a more directed, local exploration tool to explore the
sensitivity of a variable’s contribution to the feature of interest.
To simplify the task and keep its duration realistic, we consider a
variant of the manual tour called a radial tour. In a radial tour, the
magnitude of along the radius with a fixed angle of contribution, as
seen in Fig. 3. The radial tour benefits from both continuity of the data
alongside grand tours and user-steering via choosing the variable to
rotate.
Manual tours have been recently made available in the R package
spinifex [42], which facilitates manual tour (and radial variant). It also
provides an interface for a layered composition of tours and exporting
to gif and mp4 with gganimate [35] or html widget with plotly [40].
It is also compatible with tours made by tourr [48]. Now that we have
a readily available means to produce various tours, we want to see
how they fare against traditional discrete displays commonly used with
PCA.

PC1

PC2

PC3

PC4

2.4

Fig. 2. Scatterplot matrix of the first four principal components of 6D
simulated data containing four classes. The separation between classes
is primarily in PC1 and PC4. This is not uncommon because PCA is
summarizing variance, not cluster structure.

Other animated linear projections

The work of [15] allows users to interactively change the face of a
local display by navigating to adjacent faces on a global overview
scatterplot matrix. This offers analysts a way to geometrically explore
the transition between adjacent faces of a scatterplot matrix as though
rotating the face of dice at right angles. The interpolated bases between
the orthogonal faces display linear combinations of three variables at
varying degrees. This is what [27] called a little tour with the addition of
user control. It is a particular type of manual tour where only horizontal
or vertical rotation is allowed.
Star Coordinates [20] also arrive at the biplot scatterplot displays
starting from the perspective of radial parallel coordinates. [23] extend
this idea, mapping it back to orthogonal projections. They provide a
means to interpolate through PCA components, the orthogonal contributions of the scatterplot matrix, and the grand tour. This work also
defines user-controlled interaction, similar to small steps in a manual
or radial tour.
TripAdvisor [30] is an interactive application that plans sequential
interpolation between distant target bases. It also provides an additional
global context of a subset of possible frames with glyph representation
and an overview of variable attribution by summarizing the top ten
principal components. It allows for user-steering by using a “touchpad
polygon”. This touchpad allows for contribution magnitudes to be
changed. This is similar to an incremental change with the manual tour.
The number of orthogonal axes in static plots as well as the number
of bases to view in a tour increase quadratically with the dimensions,
p. This is why it is particularly important to properly select variables
or otherwise reduce the dimensions before viewing. PCA, Linear discriminant analysis and entropy are common approaches to variable
selection [37, 38, 46]. Such methods often yield a sort of screeplot [8]
where the analyst selects a subjective, but informed, number of components to approximate the data while discarding the least information.
The variable sensitivity we test for, in contrast, is the act of visual
analysis of one variable’s contribution to the structure. In practice, this
is a tool for the analyst to fine-tune their variable selection or otherwise
evaluate the resulting approximated space.
In order to further mitigate the view time, objective functions can be
used to inform static or animated biplots. A dissimilarity statistic can be
used to solve a basis path for showing a particularly interesting tour [24].
More generally projection pursuit can be used to conduct a guided
tour of any objective function applied to an embedding space [12, 13].
However, the function optimized is likely to show some feature of
interest if it is ultimately selected by the analyst. The ability to stop

distort the surface of the earth to display as a 2D map, each with unique
properties and use cases.
Because of the difficulty of interpreting the distortions of nonlinear
spaces and the added subjectivity of hyperparameter selection, we
exclude nonlinear techniques and instead, decide to compare three
linear techniques.
2.3 Tours, animated linear projections
A tour animates through many linear projections. One of the insightful
features of the tour is the permanence of the data points; one can track
the relative changes of observations as the basis changes, as opposed to
discretely jumping to an orthogonal view angle with no intermediate
information. Types of tours are distinguished by the generation of their
basis paths [13, 22]. In contrast with the discrete orientations of PCA,
we compare continuous linear projection changes with grand and radial
tours.
2.3.1 Grand tours
Target bases are selected randomly in a grand tour [4]. These target
bases are then geodesically interpolated for a smooth, continuous path.
The grand tour is the first and most widely known tour. The random
selection of target bases makes it a general unguided exploratory tool.
The grand tour will make a good comparison that has a continuity of
data points similar to the radial tour but lacks the user control enjoyed
by PCA and radial tours.
2.3.2 Manual and radial tours
Whether an analyst uses PCA or the grand tour, cannot influence the
basis. They cannot explore the structure identified or change the contribution of the variables. User-controlled steering is a key aspect of
manual tours that helps to test variable attribution.
The manual tour [11] defines its basis path by manipulating the
basis contribution of a selected variable. A manipulation dimension
is appended onto the projection plane, giving a full contribution to
the selected variable. The target bases are then chosen to rotate this
newly created manipulation space. This manipulation space is similarly
orthogonally restrained. The data is projected through its interpolated
a

b

V4
V1 V2
V3

c

V1

V4
V2

V1 V2

V3

V4

V3

Cluster

A

B

Fig. 3. A radial tour changing the contribution of V2. The contribution is in the direction of cluster separation. When its contribution is removed, the
clusters overlap (right). Because of this, we say that V2 is sensitive to the separation of these two species.

and control the exploration at any point only stands to improve one’s
understanding of the data.
2.5

Tours are linear projections that are animated over changes in the
basis. Several more-recent, orthographic-star coordinate methods independently reach animated linear projections similar to tours. Some
quality metrics and empirical studies compare techniques but scarcely
with animated methods. Below we conduct a user study to compare the
radial tour with PCA and the grand tour on a variable attribution task
on clustered data.

Empirical evaluation

Some studies compare visualizations across complete contributions of
variables. Chang [10] conducted an n = 51 participant study comparing parallel coordinate plots and scatterplot matrix either in isolation,
sequentially, or as a coordinated view. Accuracy, completion time, and
eye focus were measured for six tasks. Three tasks were more accurate
with scatterplot matrix and three with parallel coordinates, while the
coordinated view was usually marginally more accurate than the max
of the separate visuals. Cao [7] compare nonstandardized line-glyph
and star-glyphs with standardized variants (with and without fill under
the curve). Each of the n = 18 participants performed 72 trials across
the six visuals, two levels of dimensions, and two levels of observations.
Visuals with variable standardization outperformed the nonstandardized variants, and the radial star-glyph reportedly outperformed the line
variant.
Other studies have investigated the relative benefits of projecting to
2- or 3D scatterplots in PCA-reduced spaces. Gracia [18] conducted an
n = 40 user study comparing 2- and 3D scatterplots on traditional 2D
monitors. Participants perform point classification, distance perception,
and outlier identification tasks. The results are mixed and primarily
have small differences. There is some evidence to suggest a lower
error in distance perception from a 3D scatterplot. Wagner Filho [45]
performed an n = 30 mixed-design study on PCA reduced space using
scatterplot displays between 2D on monitors, 3D on monitors, and 3D
display with a head-mounted display. None of the tasks on any dataset
lead to a significant difference in accuracy. However, the immersive
display reduced effort and navigation, resulting in higher perceived
accuracy and engagement. Sedlmair [39] instead used two expert
coders to evaluate 75 datasets and four dimension reduction techniques
across the displays of 2D scatterplots, interactive 3D scatterplots, and
2D scatterplot matrices. They suggested a tiered guidance approach
finding that 2D scatterplots are often sufficient to resolve a feature. If
not, try 2D scatterplots on a different dimension reduction technique
before going to scatterplot matrix display or concluding a true negative.
They find that interactive 3D scatterplots help in very few cases.
2.6
U SER STUDY

The experiment was designed to assess the performance of the radial
tour relative to the grand tour and PCA for interpreting the variable
attribution to the separation between two clusters. Data were simulated
across three experimental factors: location of the cluster separation,
cluster shape, and data dimensionality. Participant responses were
collected using a web application and crowdsourced through prolific.co,
[33] an alternative to MTurk.
3.1

Objective

PCA will be used as a baseline for comparison as it is the most commonly used linear embedding. It will use static, discrete jumps between
orthogonal components. The grand tour will act as a secondary control
that will help evaluate the benefit of observation trackability between
nearby animation bases but without user-control of its path. Lastly, the
radial tour will be compared, which benefits from the continuity of
animation and user control of the basis.
Then for some subset of tasks, we expect to find that the radial tour
performs most accurately. Conversely, there is less to be certain about
the accuracy of such limited grand tours as there is no objective function
in selecting the bases; it is possible that the random selection of the
target bases altogether avoids the bases showing cluster separation.
However, given that the data dimensionality is modest, it is probable
that the grand tour coincidentally regularly crossed bases with the
correct information for the task.
Experimental factors and the definition of an accuracy measure are
given below. The null hypothesis can be stated as:
H0 : accuracy does not change across the visual methods
Hα : accuracy does change across the visual methods

Conclusion
3.2

Orthogonal axes visualizations either scale poorly with dimensionality
or introduce an asymmetry of the variable ordering. Projections visualize the full p-data as fewer dimensions, traditionally 1-3 at a time.
In linear, orthogonal projections, the resulting space is composed of
a linear combination of the original variables that maintain variable
interpretability. While nonlinear techniques distort and bend space in
different ways that are hard to visualize and communicate.

Visual factors

The visual methods are tested mixed design, with each visual being
evaluated twice by each participant. Scatterplot matrices or parallel coordinates could alternatively be used to visualize these spaces. However,
we opt to focus on single biplot displays to focus on the differences
between the radial tour and its most comparable visuals, rather than a
comprehensive comparison of visual methods. The rest of this section
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

Fig. 4. Examples of the application displays for PCA, grand tour, and
radial tour.

discusses the design standardization and unique input associated with
each visual.
The visualization methods were standardized wherever possible.
Data were displayed as 2D scatterplots with biplots. All aesthetic
values (color-blind safe colors, shapes, sizes, absence of legend, and
axis titles) were constant. The variable contribution biplot was always
shown left of the scatterplot embeddings with their aesthetic values
consistent. What did vary between visuals were their inputs.
PCA allowed users to select between the top four principal components for each axis regardless of the data dimensionality (four or six).
Upon changing an axis, the visual would change to the new view of orthogonal components without displaying intermediate bases. There was
no user input for the grand tour; users were instead shown a 15-second
animation of the same randomly selected path (variables containing
cluster separation were shuffled after simulation). Participants could
view the same clip up to four times within the time limit. Radial tours
allowed participants to select the manipulation variable. The starting
basis was initialized to a half-clock design, where the variables were
evenly distributed in half of the circle. This design was created to be
variable agnostic while maximizing the independence of the variables.
Selecting a new variable resets the animation where the new variable is
manipulated to a complete contribution, zeroed contribution, and then
back to its initial contribution. Animation and interpolation parameters
were held constant across grand and radial tour (five bases per second
with a step size of 0.1 radians between interpolated bases). Fig. 4
displays screen captures of the visuals in the application.
3.3

Levels of the experimental factors
PCA

Grand tour

Radial tour

Discrete jump to
selected PC pair

Animation through
random bases
V2

Animation changing
the selected variable

V3

PC j

Visual

V2
V1

V4
V4
V3

V2

V1

V1

V3
V4

PC i
33/66%

50/50%

1*V1 + 0*V2

.866*V1 + .5*V2

.7071*V1 + .7071*V2

EEE

EEV

EVV, banana transformed

Location

0/100%

Shape

c

c

(d)

c

(d)

a

b

b

(d)

a

b

a
b

4 dimensions, 3 clusters

Experimental factors
Dimension

6 dimensions, 4 clusters
Cluster 'd', above, only exists

V1

In addition to the visual method, data are simulated across three experimental factors. First, the location of the separation between clusters
is controlled by mixing a signal and a noise variable at different ratios.
Secondly, the shape of the clusters reflects varying distributions of the
data. And third, the dimension-ality of the data is also tested. The
levels within each factor are described below, and Fig. 5 gives a visual
representation.
The location of the separation between the clusters is at the heart
of the measure. It would be good to test a few varying levels. To test
the sensitivity, a noise and signal variable are mixed at different ratios.
The separation between clusters is mixed at the following percentages:
0/100% (not mixed), 33/66%, 50/50% (evenly mixed).
In selecting the shape of the clusters, the convention given by
Scrucca et al. (2016) is followed. They describe 14 variants of model
families containing three clusters. The model family name is the abbreviation of the clusters’ respective volume, shape, and orientation. The
levels are either Equal or Vary. The models EEE, EEV, and EVV are
used. For instance, in the EEV model, the volume and shape of clusters
are constant, while the shape’s orientation varies. The EVV model is
modified by moving four-fifths of the data out in a “>” or banana-like
shape.
Dimension-ality is tested at two modest levels: four dimensions
containing three clusters and six with four clusters. Such modest
dimensionality is required to limit the difficulty and search space to
make the task realistic for crowdsourcing.

b
b
b

V2
V3
V4

V1V2
V3
V4
V5
V6

when there are six dimensions,
is spherical and has a cluster
separation orthogonal to the
plane of the other three
isodensities.

Fig. 5. Levels of the visuals and three experimental factors: location
of cluster separation, the shape of clusters, and dimensionality of the
sampled data.
3.4 Task and evaluation
With our hypothesis formulated, let us turn our attention to the task
and how it is evaluated. Participants were asked to “check any/all
variables that contribute more than average to the cluster separation of
the green circles and the orange triangles”. This was further explained
in the explanatory video as “mark any and all variable that carries
more than their fair share of the weight, or one quarter in the case of
four variables”. The participant instruction video can be viewed at
https://vimeo.com/712674984.
The instructions iterated several times in the video were: 1) use the
input controls to find a basis that contains separation between the clusters of green circles and orange triangles, 2) look at the orientation of
the variable contributions in the grey circle (biplot axes orientation), and
3) select all variables that contribute more than uniformed distributed
cluster separation in the scatterplot. Independent of the experimental
level, participants were limited to 60 seconds for each evaluation of
this task. This restriction did not impact many participants as the 25th,
50th, and 75th quantiles of the response time were about 7, 21, and 30
seconds, respectively.
The accuracy measure of this task was designed with a couple of
features in mind. 1) Symmetric about the expected value, without
preference for under- or over-guessing. 2) Heavier than linear weight
with an increasing difference from the expected value. The following
measure is defined for evaluating the task.
Let the data Xi jk , i = 1, ..., n; j = 1, ..., p; k = 1, ..., K be simulated
observations containing clusters of observations of different distributions. Where n is the number of observations, p is the number of
variables, and K indicates the number of clusters. Cluster membership
is exclusive; an observation cannot belong to more than one cluster.
The weights, w, is a vector of the variable-wise difference between
the mean of two clusters of less 1/p, the expected cluster separation
if it were uniformly distributed. Accuracy, A is defined as the signed
square of these weights if selected by the participant. Participant
responses are a logical value for each variable — whether or not the
participant thinks each variable separates the two clusters more than
uniformly distributed separation. Weights comparing clusters 1 and 2
are calculated as follows:

location level across the increasing difficulty of dimension and shape.
The plot was removed after 60 seconds, though participants rarely
reached this limit.
We assigned these factors based on the following order: visual
methods, location, shape, and dimensionality. We first assigned three
visual methods to three different sessions. The session order and the
order of location follow a nested Latin square. The order of dimension
and shape are assigned based on increasing order of difficulty.
Through pilot studies sampled by convenience (information technology and statistics Ph.D. students attending Monash University), it was
estimated that three complete evaluations are needed to power the study
properly, a total of N = 3 × 3!2 = 108 participants.
3.6

N = 108 participants were recruited via prolific.co (Palan and Schitter
2018). Participants are restricted based on their claimed education
requiring that they have completed at least an undergraduate degree
(some 58,700 of the 150,400 users at the time). This restriction is
used on the premise that linear projections and biplot displays will
not be regularly used for consumption by general audiences. There
is also the implicit filter that Prolific participants must be at least 18
years of age and have implicit biases of timezone, internet availability,
language compatibility, and socioeconomic status. Participants were
compensated for their time at £7.50 per hour, whereas the mean duration
of the survey was about 16 minutes. Previous knowledge or familiarity
was minimal, as validated in the follow-up survey. The Supplemental
Materials include a heatmap distribution of age and education paneled
across preferred pronouns of the participants that completed the survey,
who are relatively young, well-educated, and slightly more likely to
identify as males.
∑ I( j) · sign(w j ) · w2j , where

j=1

wj =

R ESULTS

To recap, the primary response variable is accuracy, as defined in
Sect. 3.4. Two primary data sets were collected; the user study evaluations and the post-study survey. The former is the 108 participants with
the experimental factors: visual, location of the cluster separation signal, the shape of the variance-covariance matrix, and the dimensionality
of the data. Experimental factors and randomization were discussed
in Sect. 3.3. A follow-up survey was completed by 84 of these 108
people. It collected demographic information (preferred pronoun, age,
and education) and subjective measures for each visual (preference,
familiarity, ease of use, and confidence).
Below a battery of mixed regression models is built to examine the
degree of the evidence and the size of the effects of the experimental
factors. Then, Likert plots and rank-sum tests to compare the subjective
measures between the visuals.

p

A=

Participants

X · j1 − X · j2
−
p
p
(|X
−
X
|)
∑ j=1 · j1
· j2

where
I is the indicator function, returning a binary response
X · jk , mean of the j-th variable of the k-th cluster
where I( j) is the indicator function, the binary response for variable j.
Fig. 6 shows one projection of a simulation with its observed variable
separation (wide bars), expected uniform separation (dashed line), and
accuracy if selected (thin vertical lines).

4.1

Accuracy

To quantify the contribution of the experimental factors to the accuracy,
mixed-effects models were fit. All models have a random effect term
on the participant and the simulation. These terms explain the amount
of error attributed to the individual participant’s effect and variation
due to the random sampling data.
In building a set of models to test, a base model with only the visual
term being compared with the full linear model term and progressively
interacting with an additional experimental factor. The models with
three and four interacting variables are rank deficient; there is not
enough varying information in the data to explain all interacting terms.

3.5 Randomized factor assignment
Now, with simulation and their artifacts in hand, this section covers
how the experimental factors are assigned and demonstrate how this is
experienced from the participant’s perspective.
The study is sectioned into three periods. Each period is linked to a
randomized level of visual and location. The order of dimension and
shape are of secondary interest and are held constant in increasing order
of difficulty; four then six dimensions and EEE, EEV, then EVV-banana,
respectively.
Each period starts with an untimed training task at the simplest
remaining experimental levels; location = 0/100%, shape = EEE, and
four dimensions with three clusters. This serves to introduce and
familiarize participants with input and visual differences. After the
training, the participant performs two trials with the same visual and

Fixed effects
α
α +β +γ +δ
α ×β +γ +δ
α ×β ×γ +δ
α ×β ×γ ×δ
Full model
Yb = µ + αi + Z + W + ε
Yb = µ + αi + β j + γk + δl + Z + W + ε
Yb = µ + αi × β j + γk + δl + Z + W + ε
Yb = µ + αi × β j × γk + δl + Z + W + ε
Yb = µ + αi × β j × γk × δl + Z + W + ε

Bars: observed cluster separation
Lines: accuracy weights if selected

© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

Visual: PCA, location: 33/66%,
Shape: EEV, dimension: 6 & 4 clusters

PC4

V2
V4

V1

V3
V6
V5

0.4

1/p = 0.17

0.2

0.0
PC1
3
5
Variable

Fig. 6. Illustration of how accuracy is measured. (L), Scatterplot and biplot of PC1 by PC4 of a simulated data set (R) illustrate cluster separation
between the green circles and orange triangles. Bars indicate observed cluster separation, and (red/green) lines show the accuracy of the variable if
selected. The horizontal dashed line has a height 1/p, the expected value of cluster separation. The accuracy weights equal the signed square of
the difference between each variable value and the dashed line.
Table 1. Model performance of random effect models regressing accuracy.
Complex models perform better in terms of R2 and RMSE, yet AIC and
BIC penalize their large number of fixed effects in favor of the much
simpler model containing only the visuals. Conditional R2 includes error
explained by the random effects, while marginal does not.
Model

AIC

BIC

R2 cond.

R2 marg.

RMSE

a
a+b+c+d
a*b+c+d
a*b*c+d
a*b*c*d

-71
-45
-26
105

-71
-45
-25
116

-44.219
4.063
41.445
167.092
360.052

0.303
0.334
0.338
0.383
0.37

0.289
0.294
0.293
0.309
0.19

Table 2. The task accuracy model coefficients for Yb = α × β + γ + δ ,
with visual = pca, location = 0/100%, shape = EEE, and dim = 4 held
as baselines. Visual being radial is the fixed term with the strongest
evidence supporting the hypothesis. Interacting with the location term,
there is evidence suggesting radial performs with minimal improvement
for 33/66% location mixing.

where
µ is the intercept of the model
αi is the visual | i ∈ (pca, grand, radial)
β j is the location | j ∈ (0/100, 33/66, 50/50% mix)
γk is the shape | k ∈ (EEE, EEV, EVV banana)
δl is the dimension | l ∈ (4 & 3, 6 & 4) var & clusters
Z ∼ N (0, τ) is the random effect of participant
W ∼ N (0, υ) is the random effect of simulation
ε ∼ N (0, σ ) is the remaining error of the model

Table 1 compares the model summaries across increasing complexity.
The α × β + γ + δ model is selected to examine in more detail as it
has relatively high condition R2 and not overly complex interacting
terms. Table 2 looks at the coefficients for this model. There is strong
evidence suggesting a relatively large increase in accuracy from the
radial tour, though there is evidence that almost all of the increase the
is lost under 33/66% mixing.
We also want to visually examine the conditional variables in the
model. Fig. 7 illustrates the accuracy for each model term shown as
mean and 95% confidence interval.
4.2

Subjective measures

Modeling has proven that the use of the radial tour leads to a sizable
improvement in the accuracy measure for this task. This is not the
whole story. It is desirable to know what the users think of using
the visuals. We follow the direction set by [45]. They observe four
Est

SE

df

t val

Prob

(Intercept)

0.10

0.06

16.1

1.54

0.143

Factor
VisGrand
VisRadial

0.06
0.14

0.04
0.04

622.1
617.0

1.63
3.77

0.104
0.000

Fixed effects
Loc33/66%
Loc50/50%
ShapeEEV
ShapeBanana
Dim6

-0.02
-0.04
-0.05
-0.09
-0.01

0.07
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.05

19.9
20.0
11.8
11.8
11.8

-0.29
-0.66
-0.82
-1.54
-0.23

0.777
0.514
0.427
0.150
0.824

Interactions
VisGrand:Loc33/66
VisRadial:Loc33/66
VisGrand:Loc50/50
VisRadial:Loc50/50

-0.02
-0.12
-0.03
-0.06

0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06

588.9
586.5
591.6
576.3

-0.29
-2.13
-0.47
-1.16

0.774
0.033
0.641
0.248

***

*

Violin plots of the terms for accuracy: Y1^ = α * β + γ + δ

Subjective measures
Likert scale [1−5]

0.15

confidence

75%
0.08

50%

0.10

0.10

25%
0%
100%

0.06
0.05

0.05

75%

0.05

50%

pca grandradial

0/10033/6650/50%

EEE EEVbanana

Visual

Location

Shape

0/100%
6

75%

Dim

33/66%

50%
25%

50/50%

0%
100%

0.25

preference

75%

0.20

Accuracy

25%
0%
100%

familiarity

Visual

0.04
0.00

0.00

50%
25%

0.15

familiarity

preference

2.5

2.0

3.5

3.0

0%
radial

0.10

grand

pca

2.5

Response rate

0.05

Response

0.00

2.0

most agree
agree
pca

grand

radial

pca

grand

radial

pca

grand

radial

Visual

pca

grand

pca grand radial

neutral

Visual

pca grand radial

Visual

disagree
most disagree

radial

visual

pca

grand

radial

Fig. 8. The subjective measures of the 84 responses of the post-study
survey with five-point Likert items levels of agreement. (L) Likert plots
(stacked percent bar plots) with (R) mean and 95% CI of the same
measures. Participants are more confident using the radial tour and find
it easier to use than the grand tour. The radial tour is the most preferred
visual.

Fig. 7. Accuracy of terms of the model Yb = α × β + γ + δ . Viewing the
marginal accuracy of the terms corroborates the primary findings that
the use of the radial tour leads to a significant increase in accuracy, at
least over PCA, and this effect is particularly well supported when no
location mixing is applied.

A mixed modeling analysis of the study provides strong support
for this conclusion. That is, there is significant evidence to suggest
the use of the radial tour leads to a sizable increase in accuracy. One
unexpected caveat is that mixing the location of the signal at 33/66%
almost completely negates this gain. Perhaps this is because the “halfclock” basis used did not give enough weight to the variable containing
the small fraction. It was also interesting to note that no level of the
experimental factors alone had a significant effect on this setup. Lastly,
the follow-up survey asked participants to evaluate measures of the
visuals. Most notably, participants preferred the radial tour to the other
visuals. Knowing that the radial tour outperforms alternatives and is
the preferred choice can help inform the selection of visual methods
for developers and analysts.
There are several implicit limitations to this study: the task, type
of data, and levels of the factors to name a few. The expansion of any
of these areas is conceptually simple, but exponentially increases the
number of participants needed to properly power the study. Additionally
the sample of crowd-sourced, educated, but unfamiliar users may not
extrapolate well to more experienced users. There are several ways that
future work could be extended. Aside from expanding the support of
the experimental factors, more exciting directions include: introducing
a new task, including more visualizations, and changing the experience
level of the target population. It is difficult to achieve good coverage
given the number of possible factors to vary.

subjective measures. The following were used in this study: confidence,
ease of use, prior familiarity, and preference. Each of these questions
was asked of all for each visual as 5-point Likert items.
The 84 evaluations of the post-study survey are shown in Fig. 8. The
figure uses Likert plots or stacked percentage bar plots and asscoisated
mean and 95% confidence intervals.
There was strong evidence to support that participants preferred the
radial tour to either alternative. There is less evidence that the radial
tour led to more confidence and was found easier to use than the grand
tour. In confirmation of expectations, crowdsourced participants had
low familiarity with all visuals, with no difference in mean supported.
ease of use

3.0

ease of use

Accuracy

0.10

confidence
3.5

100%

Response

0.15

D ISCUSSION

Data visualization is an integral part of understanding relationships
in data and how models are fitted. When it comes to multivariate
data giving a comprehensive view quickly becomes difficult as the
dimensions become sizable. Analysts have the task of choosing which
visualization technique to use. Because the viewing volume/time of
multivariate spaces typically increase quadratically with dimensions
dimension reduction must be properly conducted. While there are
optimization methods for static and animated visuals, the particular
function used is a guided choice of the analyst.
Sect. 2 discussed various types of visualization which are may be
preferred for differing tasks and ends. The visualization and perception
of multivariate spaces is a broad and heterogeneous task. This work
focuses a subset of linear projections and especially sheds light on
potential benefit of providing user control in conjunction with the
animated projection over many bases as a radial tour.
The radial tour is a method for the analyst to choose a variable to
alter its contribution to the basis. The animation over small changes
to the basis allows the sensitivity of the structure to be assessed from
the variable contribution. The hypothesis is that user control over the
basis and the permanence of observations between intermediate frames
may lead to a better perception of the variable attribution causing the
separation of clusters.
C ONCLUSION

This paper discussed a crowdsourced mixed design user study (n = 108)
comparing the efficacy of three linear projection techniques: PCA,
grand tour, and radial tour. The participants performed a supervised
cluster task, explicitly identifying which variables contribute to the
separation of two target clusters. This was evaluated evenly over four
experimental factors. In summary, mixed model regression finds strong
evidence that using the radial tour sizably increases accuracy, especially when cluster separation location is not mixed at 33/66%. The
effect sizes on accuracy are large relative to the change from the other
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
experimental factors and the random effect of data simulation, though
smaller than the random effect of the participant. The radial tour was
the most preferred of the three visuals.
There is no panacea for the comprehensive visualization of multivariate spaces. We have demonstrated that there is a definite value of
user-control in linear projections. The agency of the analyst remains an
important tool for the exploratory analysis of multivariate data.

of Quality Quantification. Information Visualization, 15(1):3–30, 2016.
[19] G. Grinstein, M. Trutschl, and U. Cvek. High-Dimensional Visualizations.
p. 14, 2002.
IEEE Information Visualization Symposium, Late Breaking Hot Topics, pp.
9–12, 2000.
[21] W. Karwowski. International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human
Factors, -3 Volume Set. CRC Press, 2006.
[22] S. Lee, D. Cook, N. da Silva, U. Laa, N. Spyrison, E. Wang, and H. S.
Zhang. The state-of-the-art on tours for dynamic visualization of highdimensional data. WIREs Computational Statistics, n/a(n/a):e1573, 2021.
[23] D. J. Lehmann and H. Theisel. Orthographic star coordinates. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2615–2624,
2013. Publisher: IEEE.
[24] D. J. Lehmann and H. Theisel. Optimal Sets of Projections of HighDimensional Data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
[25] S. Liu, D. Maljovec, B. Wang, P.-T. Bremer, and V. Pascucci. Visualizing
High-Dimensional Data: Advances in the Past Decade. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(3):1249–1268, 2017. doi: 10
.1109/TVCG.2016.2640960
[26] J. Matejka and G. Fitzmaurice. Same Stats, Different Graphs: Generating
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17, pp. 1290–1294. ACM Press,
[27] J. A. McDonald. Interactive graphics for data analysis. Technical report,
1982.
[29] T. Munzner. Visualization analysis and design, 2014.
[30] J. E. Nam and K. Mueller. Tripadvisorˆ{ND}: A tourism-inspired highdimensional space exploration framework with overview and detail. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 19(2):291–305, 2012.
Publisher: IEEE.
[31] L. Nelson, D. Cook, and C. Cruz-Neira. Xgobi vs the c2: Results of an
experiment comparing data visualization in a 3-d immersive virtual reality
environment with a 2-d workstation display. Computational Statistics,
14(1):39–51, Dec. 1999.
[32] M. d. Ocagne. Coordonne’es paralle’les et axiales. Me’thode de transformation ge’ome’trique et proce’de’ nouveau de calcul graphique de’duits
de la conside’ration des coordonne’es paralle’les. Gauthier-Villars, Paris,
1885.
[33] S. Palan and C. Schitter. Prolific: A subject pool for online experiments.
Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 17:22–27, 2018.
[34] K. Pearson. LIII. On Lines and Planes of Closest fit to Systems of Points
in Space. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine
and Journal of Science, 2(11):559–572, 1901.
[35] T. L. Pedersen and D. Robinson. gganimate: A Grammar of Animated
Graphics. 2020.
[36] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2020.
[37] A. Sanchez, L. Raya, M. A. Mohedano-Munoz, and M. Rubio-Sanchez.
1007/s00371-020-01793-w
[38] A. Sanchez, C. Soguero-Ruiz, I. Mora-Jimenez, F. J. Rivas-Flores, D. J.
Lehmann, and M. Rubio-Sanchez. Scaled radial axes for interactive visual
feature selection: A case study for analyzing chronic conditions. Expert
2018.01.054
[39] M. Sedlmair, T. Munzner, and M. Tory. Empirical Guidance on Scatterplot
and Dimension Reduction Technique Choices. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization & Computer Graphics, (12):2634–2643, 2013.
[40] C. Sievert. Interactive Web-Based Data Visualization with R, plotly, and
shiny. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2020.
[41] J. P. Snyder. Map projections–A working manual, vol. 1395. US Government Printing Office, 1987.
[42] N. Spyrison and D. Cook. spinifex: an R Package for Creating a Manual

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by an Australian Government Research
Training Program (RTP) scholarship. This article was created in R [36]
and rmarkdown [49]. Visuals were prepared with spinifex [42]. We
thank Jieyang Chong for his help in proofreading this article. The code,
response files, their analyses, and the study application are publicly
available at https://github.com/nspyrison/spinifex_study.
The participant instruction video can be viewed at https://vimeo.
com/712674984.