Inconsistencies in Masked Language Models
Tom Young
Yunan Chen
Yang You
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
tomyoung903@gmail.com, chen.yunan_01@u.nus.edu, youy@comp.nus.edu.sg
Code: https://github.com/tomyoung903/MLM_inconsistencies/tree/master

Abstract

2022b), GPT-FIM (Bavarian et al., 2022), UL2 (Tay
et al., 2022a), and GLM (Zeng et al., 2022) have
hinted that incorporating the MLM objective could
be highly beneficial to performance. In addition,
Tay et al. (2022b) has demonstrated that such bidirectional conditionals provide strong infilling capabilities. Empirically speaking, predicting masked
tokens in the middle of the sentence can be seen
as a natural data augmentation technique to vanilla
next token prediction, which might be helpful to
alleviating the data scarcity problem (Xue et al.,
2023) in the current large model era.
One may notice that, unlike the unidirectional
conditional distributions that vanilla next token prediction learns, the bidirectional conditionals that
MLMs learn are overly abundant in terms of representing a coherent joint distribution. Therefore,
they are not guaranteed to be self-consistent. This
paper explains our effort on exposing and quantifying this issue and corresponding strategies during
inference.

Learning to predict masked tokens in a sequence has been shown to be a helpful pretraining objective for powerful language models such as PaLM2. After training, such masked
language models (MLMs) can provide distributions of tokens in the masked positions in a
sequence. However, this paper shows that distributions corresponding to different masking
patterns can demonstrate considerable inconsistencies, i.e., they cannot be derived from a
coherent joint distribution when considered together.
This fundamental flaw in MLMs can lead
to self-contradictory behaviors during inference. On various benchmark datasets including
MMLU, MLMs can give different predictions
to the same input question. From BERT-base
to UL2-20B, we show that such inconsistencies
exist ubiquitously in MLMs of diverse sizes
and configurations. In light of our observations,
we further propose an inference-time strategy
for MLMs called Ensemble of Conditionals.
It jointly considers a selected range of inconsistent conditionals directly produced by the
MLM for the final prediction, which often leads
to considerable accuracy improvement.
Introduction

Pretraining objectives of large language models
can be roughly divided into two categories. First,
vanilla next token prediction (also known as casual
language modeling) aims to learn the distribution
of the next token in a sequence given the context to
the left (Brown et al., 2020). Second, the masked
language modeling (MLM) objective, which masks
out a portion of the tokens in a sequence and asks
the model to predict them, aims to learn the distribution of one or more tokens given surrounding
context (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020).
While GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) used vanilla
next token prediction, following work such as
PaLM-2 (Anil et al., 2023), U-PaLM (Tay et al.,

Figure 1: Self-ensembling improves MLMs’ accuracies
on standard benchmarks including MMLU, Lambada
and BigBench. Aggregated results based on Figure 5.

To begin with, a simple example for such inconsistencies is shown in Figure 2. In this example, we
obtain the bidirectional conditional distributions
that the T5 model learned using two input masked
sequences. The two similar sequences are designed
with a small difference, in order to examine if the
resulting conditionals satisfy a basic law of probabilities (hold consistency). Results clearly show
otherwise. We design experiments to quantify such
inconsistencies on benchmark datasets in Section
4.2. We further show an inference-time ensemble
algorithm in Section 4.3 which utilizes many inconsistent conditionals for a more accurate prediction.
We demonstrate that ensembling the numerous inconsistent conditionals directly provided by the
MLM can improve its performance (Figure 1).
In summary, our contributions are (1) We expose
the commonly overlooked flaw in MLMs that they
can represent inconsistent distributions depending
on the mask patterns. (2) We quantify such inconsistencies in benchmark datasets including Lambada (Paperno et al., 2016), MMLU(Hendrycks
et al., 2021) and BigBench (Srivastava et al., 2023).
For example, on multiple choice questions in
MMLU, 2 different distributions given by UL220B disagree on the answer 14% of the time on average. (3) We show that the numerous inconsistent
conditionals can be ensembled together to considerably improve accuracy on said benchmarks.
constraint on the joint distribution. One can easily
verify (by counting the conditionals left to right
for a geometric sequence) that a vanilla next token prediction based language model provides just
|V |L −1 free conditionals1 to exactly determine the
joint distribution. Therefore, a vanilla next token
prediction model (no matter how it is trained, or
even untrained) would never suffer from inconsistencies among its conditionals.
MLMs, which can provide distributions of
masked tokens given bidirectional context, could
specify far more free conditionals. For the simplest case, where the MLM predicts the distribution
of only 1 (masked) token given L − 1 other (unmasked) tokens in the sequence, the total number
of free conditionals (N ) is
Nmlm (1) = L × (|V |L − |V |L−1 ),

Just Nmlm (1) is already far larger than Djoint .
Not to mention Nmlm (k) for k ∈ [2, N − 1]. See
Appendix B for Nmlm (k) and both of their derivations. The fact that the number of conditionals
an MLM provides far exceeds what is needed for
defining a joint distribution sets up room for there
to be inconsistencies among them.
The first portion of our experiments (Sections
4.2 & 5) focus on exposing and quantifying the
inconsistencies that exist among the conditionals
provided by common MLMs. The second portion
of our experiments (Section 4.3) demonstrates our
new inference-time algorithm “Ensemble of Conditionals” that unites them for more accurate predictions.
To begin with, the next section explains the backbone models that this paper works with.

Why inconsistencies can occur in
MLMs

For a set of conditional distributions to be selfconsistent, they need to be able to be derived from
a single coherent joint distribution.
One essential reason for the inconsistencies to
occur among the conditionals provided by a trained
MLM is that the number of conditionals it can
provide far exceeds the degrees of freedom of a
joint distribution.
Consider a sequence of length L with vocabulary
V . The joint distribution of the tokens in such a
sequence is defined by |V |L probabilities that sum
to 1. Therefore, the degrees of freedom (D) of such
a joint distribution is:
Djoint = |V |L − 1,

(2)
Backbone MLMs

We work with 3 different MLMs in this paper that
belong to two different styles, which can be called
the T5-style and the BERT-style.
3.1

(1)

T5-style

For T5-style MLMs, the definition here is that each
mask token in the input functions as a placeholder
for the prediction of an entire span of tokens of
variable length. Below we introduce 2 different

Both vanilla next token prediction models and
MLMs essentially learn conditionals that predict
some tokens in the sequence given others. Such
conditional probabilities and probabilities from the
joint distribution can be linearly derived from each
other. Therefore, each free conditional that the
language model is capable of specifying places a
A single softmax operation over V essentially gives |V |−
1 free conditionals. Here we call conditionals free when they
can be assigned any values decided by an underlying neural
network.
Figure 2: A simple bigram comparison example that exposes the inconsistencies in the T5 model. The conditional
probabilities that the model learned (quoted from T5-11B fed with the shown masked sequences) contradict each
other greatly. Not only are the ratios unbalanced, the model confuses its own preference of the two bigrams.

T5-style MLMs that we will work with in the experiments. They differ in their architecture design,
masking strategies and sizes.

• The X(Extreme)-Denoiser is an extreme
version of denoising marked by long corrupted spans or high corruption rates. The
X-Denoiser is aimed as an interpolation between R- and S-Denoiser.

1. T5
The T5 model (Raffel et al., 2020) uses an
Encoder-Decoder architecture. It uses a corruption rate of 15% and an average span
length of 3 tokens. The masked spans can be
anywhere in the sequence. We use the largest
model T5-11B in the experiments.

Tay et al. (2022a) showed that such a mixture
of masking strategies achieved a superior performance than T5 on many tasks. The 3 different denoisers were differentiated by 3 respective sentinel tokens ([R], [S], [X]) prepended
to the sequence. These sentinel tokens are
also used during inference to invoke the corresponding behavior from the model. Without
losing generality, we restrict ourselves to the
X-Denoiser in our experiments due to its superior performance in our pilot trials.

2. UL2-20B
The UL2 model (Tay et al., 2022a) follows
T5’s architecture design and aims to mix up 3
masking strategies to more comprehensively
utilize the pretraining corpus. The MLM objective is also known as the auto-denoising
objective, since the masks can be considered
as adding noise to the sequence. UL2 calls
masking strategies denoisers.

3.2

BERT-style

Our definition for BERT-style MLMs, named after BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), is that the model
uses each mask token as the placeholder for the
prediction of exactly one real token. We use the
better-trained RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) for our
experiments as our example for BERT-style MLMs,
which shares the same architecture as BERT. While
considered somewhat deprecated (Tay et al., 2022a)
compared to later MLMs like T5, UL2 and PaLM2,

• The R(Regular)-Denoiser mimics T5’s masking scheme.
• The S(Sequential)-Denoiser simply partitions the input sequence into two consecutive sub-sequences and predict the second subsequence as the masked sequence.
BERTs are unique in terms of their architecture
design because they use a single transformer with
bi-directional attention (or, an Encoder-only architecture), as opposed to GPTs (Radford et al., 2018;
Brown et al., 2020), which use a transformer with
uni-directional attention (Decoder-only) or the T5
model (Encoder-Decoder).
Our paper mainly focuses on the inconsistencies in T5-style MLMs since they are most useful in practice (Section 4). But we also touch on
BERT-style MLMs due to its unique architecture
and historical impact (Section 5).
Inconsistencies in T5-style MLMs

4.1

Conditionals for various mask patterns

in the third row in Figure 3). This pattern is
also parameterized by span length S and gap
length G between spans. Recall that masking
multiple spans is a common practice during
the pretraining of MLMs. When our input contains multiple [MASK]’s, we feed additional tokens to the decoder, which correspond to the
masked tokens in the N spans. The Multimask
pattern will prompt the MLM to generate another different version of our conditional of
interest.
While our K-offset and Multimask conditionals
may seem contrived at first glance, they potentially
represent different knowledge learned by the model
during pretraining. And as we will show in the
sections next, they often contradict the baseline
conditional and can be complementary to it.
To begin with, we select a number of specific
mask patterns through parameterization of K-offset
and Multimask patterns. This is done on the validation set of the evaluation dataset based on their
individual accuracies. For any dataset in Lambada,
MMLU and BigBench and any model in UL2 and
T5, we always consider 10 types of conditional
distributions as our set of interest. For example,
for the combination of UL2 and Lambada we consider the baseline conditional, 6 K-offset conditionals (K ∈ [1, 6]), and 3 Multimask conditionals
((N, S, G) ∈ {(3, 5, 1), (3, 5, 2), (3, 10, 1)}). See
the full list of patterns in Appendix C.

This section lists a few different types of conditional distributions that a trained T5-style MLM
can give depending on the mask pattern. This sets
up for the next two Sections (4.2 and 4.3 )which discusses their inconsistencies and how to ensemble
them on various benchmark datasets.
First, we discuss the baseline conditional distribution (first row in Figure 3). Since most NLP
tasks can be formulated as predicting continuing tokens given an input sequence, we consider the use
case of MLMs where we append a single [MASK]
token behind the input sequence (Tay et al., 2022a).
The MLM takes as input this modified sequence
to generate a distribution of tokens for the [MASK]
position, which is essentially our distribution of
interest for the target tokens.
Tweaking the mask pattern can make the MLM
generate different values for our target distributions
of tokens. We consider two types of mask patterns:
the K-offset pattern and the Multimask pattern.

4.2

Exposing inconsistencies

To quantitatively expose the severity of the inconsistencies among the numerous conditionals we use
3 benchmark datasets.

1. The K-offset mask pattern additionally masks
the last K tokens from the input sequence
(K = 3 in the second row in Figure 3), and
feed them to the MLM as given output. For
example, for Encoder-Decoder models like
UL2, we feed K starting tokens to the decoder
instead of the usual 02 . The model then generates a different version of our distribution
of interest. Because of the inconsistency issue, this new distribution is often remarkably
different than the one from the baseline.

1. Lambada (LAnguage Modeling Broadened to
Account for Discourse Aspects): Lambada is
a dataset crafted to test the capabilities of computational models in language understanding,
particularly in predicting the final word of a
text passage when it requires understanding
the broader context. This dataset focuses on
the challenge of word prediction requiring a
broad discourse context, aiming to evaluate if
models can effectively utilize long-range dependencies in text. To evaluate inconsistency
and ensembling on Lambada, we use the baseline conditional to generate on average 5 last
words as candidates.

2. The Multimask pattern additionally masks N
random spans in the input sequence (N = 1
For decoder-only MLMs like PaLM2, the input tokens
and the K tokens are simply concatenated.
Figure 3: K-offset and Multimask patterns. The goal here is to prompt the MLM for different versions of the target
token distribution. The red token is our target token. The coral tokens are taken from the original input sequence
and fed as starting tokens to the decoder of the MLM.

2. MMLU (Massive Multitask Language Understanding): The MMLU benchmark represents
a leap towards evaluating the comprehensive
knowledge acquired by models during pretraining. It encompasses a wide array of subjects, spanning elementary to advanced professional levels across STEM, humanities, and
social sciences. MMLU aims to understand
the depth and breadth of models’ knowledge
and reasoning abilities. MMLU is a multiple
choice dataset from which the model chooses
the best answer given the input question.

highest, another conditional under our consideration might rank Persian the highest. We choose
between 2 to 10 conditionals from our set of interest. When we choose less than 10 conditionals, all
possible combinations are run and the results are
aggregated. We count how often the conditionals
cannot agree on the prediction. Figure 4 shows
that there exists considerable disagreement among
the different conditionals we consider. And as expected, the more conditionals are considered, the
more likely there is disagreement. But even with
2 conditionals, the disagreement can be as high
as 20%. However, disagreement converges to an
upper bound. This means that there exists some
questions in every benchmark on which the model
is “confident” on its answer.

3. BigBench (Beyond the Imitation Game
Benchmark): BigBench focuses on challenging tasks and aim to evaluate and understand
models’ performance across a spectrum of
complexities and subject areas. This benchmark is designed not just to test models but
also to highlight potential areas for future research and development. Similar to MMLU,
BigBench is also a multiple choice dataset.

4.3

Ensemble of Conditionals

l
Since we have shown that there are considerable
inconsistencies among the conditionals corresponding to different masking patterns, it is worth investigating the potential benefit of ensembling them at
inference time.
The gist of Ensemble of Conditionals (EOC) is
to put the numerous raw conditionals provided by a
trained MLM through an ensemble heuristic. EOC
can be seen as a self-ensemble approach where the
different outputs provided by one model are ensembled together, similar to ensembling outputs from
multiple models in traditional ensemble learning.
To ensemble different conditionals for a final pre-

We show that these incoherent conditionals often
disagree on which answer is the best for a multichoice question in MMLU and BigBench or which
word is the best for last word prediction in Lambada. We demonstrate such incoherence on the
three datasets by measuring how often the distributions cannot agree on the prediction.
For example, consider a toy last word prediction task mimicking Lambada: The cutest cat
breed in the world is the [MASK]. While
the baseline conditional might rank Munchkin the
Figure 4: Different conditionals disagree on the prediction to make.

diction, we use the max-pooling approach3 . Consider that the ith competing conditional assigns
probability pij to the jth candidate completion (either a last word candidate in Lambada or an answer
from a multiple choice question in MMLU). The
winning conditional and final completion prediction is
î, ĵ = arg max pij ,

energy-based model defined using the bidirectional
conditionals of the masked tokens. Such research
effort is based on the intuition that bidirectional
conditionals could be more robust than unidirectional conditionals (Goyal, 2021). This line of research has operated based on the assumption that
the overly abundant bidirectional conditionals that
the BERT-style MLMs provide are self-consistent.
We demonstrate in this section that this is not
the case at all. There are considerable inconsistencies that exist among the bidirectional conditionals
that a trained BERT-style model provides. Figure 6
demonstrates such an example. Since BERT-style
models do not easily offer token distributions for
completions, here we use bigrams in raw unstructured text to expose the inconsistencies instead of
on standard benchmarks.
We consider 4 bigrams in a surrounding context:
x11 x21 , x11 x22 , x12 x21 and x12 x22 . x11 and x12
are two possible tokens that the first position can
take; x21 and x22 the second. One can easily verify4 that the 8 conditional distributions concerning
such four bigrams should theoretically satisfy

(3)

In our experiments, we progressively ensemble
more conditionals to observe accuracy changes.
Similar to in the experiment on disagreement, when
the number of ensembled conditionals is less that
the total 10, all combinations are run and the results are aggregated. Results in Figure 5 show that
EOC can improve the accuracy of the model’s final
prediction. In additional, more ensembled conditionals can lead to higher accuracy.
Inconsistencies in BERT-style MLMs

T5-style MLMs have the flexibility of generating
sequences of variable length and are very useful
in practice. Although researchers mainly focus
on T5-style MLMs in the current era, we touch
on inconsistencies in BERT-style MLMs in this
section because of the historical impactfulness of
the BERT model and their unique architecture with
only bidirectional attention.
While BERT-style models can only model the
distributions of individual tokens by their default
design, there has been research effort (Goyal et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2019; Yamakoshi et al., 2022) on
sampling sequences from it by modeling its implicitly specified joint distribution one way or another.
For example, Goyal et al. (2021) views it as an
p(x21 |x11 ) p(x11 |x22 )
×
=
p(x22 |x11 ) p(x12 |x22 )
p(x11 |x21 ) p(x21 |x12 )
×
p(x12 |x21 ) p(x22 |x12 )

(4)

One way to test the inconsistencies among the 8
conditionals is to try to solve one using the other
7 and compare the solved conditional with the
original (inferred by model) one. We show the
solved conditionals in the example in Figure 6. It
clearly demonstrates that the probabilities given by
Clue: converting each fraction term using the basic law
in Figure 2. Equation 4 was discussed in (Arnold and Press,
1989).

Outperforms average-pooling in our pilot experiments.
Figure 5: EOC improves MLM accuracy
Table 1: Difference of log-probabilities between inferred and solved conditionals. The difference would be 0 for
self-consistent MLMs. Roughly a 0.8 difference means that one is 120% larger than the other.

Metric
log-probability difference (dlog p )

RoBERTa-base
0.836

a BERT-style MLM can be in serious inconsistencies with each other.
We use the first segment of the validation partition of the C4 (Raffel et al., 2020) dataset as the
unstructured text corpus for quantification. Our
goal here is to come up with quadruples of bigrams
in the form of (x11 x21 , x11 x22 , x12 x21 , x12 x22 )
in a certain context. We perform a full bigram
sweep for the sequence. We always include the
original bigram into the quadruple. To find the 3
alternative bigrams, we mask the whole original bigram, and generate alternatives using BART (Lewis
et al., 2019). In practice, we use beam search in
bart.generate() with beam size 50. Note that
BART by default is a T5-style MLM therefore it
can generates multiple tokens for one mask. We
keep all resulting generations that are 2 tokens. We
verify if there is a quadruple of bigrams in the generations in the said fashion and add them to our
diagnostics dataset if so. We end up with 7431
quadruples. The following is an example in our

RoBERTa-large
0.792

diagnostics dataset.
Original sequence: Brown cats are the most
common type of pets in America.
Original bigram: Brown cats (x11 x21 ).
Alternative bigrams: Brown dogs (x11 x22 ),
White cats (x12 x21 ), White dogs (x12 x22 ).
To obtain conditionals in Figure 6, we mask the
bigram with two [MASK]’s and feed the sequence
to Roberta.
Note that there are many variables that go into
building the diagnostics dataset. Our approaches
were automatic but also somewhat unprincipled.
We are not surprised if variations in the diagnostics dataset could result in some differences in the
evaluation results.
We quantify inconsistencies using difference of
log probabilities5 .
dlog p = | log psolved − log pinferred |
(5)

Here using logarithm makes it robust against changes in
scale. One may also use other metrics for quantification.
Figure 6: Inconsistencies in the BERT-style MLM. Each “inferred” value refers to the probability given by the
MLM (RoBERTa-large in this figure). Each “solved” value is obtained by passing the other 7 “inferred” values to
the equation in the red square. We see that the difference between each inferred and solved value is significant (the
solved value may even be larger than 1).

Table 1 shows the results, which clearly indicate strong inconsistencies among the bidirectional
conditionals provided by the RoBERTa model.
are distinct from the focus of our discussion. The
inconsistencies highlighted in this paper address
the peculiarities of MLMs in the fundamental space
of token distributions.

Summary & Discussions
Limitations

This paper focused on the inconsistency problem
concerning the conditionals provided by MLMs.
We demonstrated and quantified the inconsistencies that exist in large MLMs. Based on our observations, we propose an inference-time approach
that ensembles multiple inconsistent conditionals
to improve the models’ performance. The inconsistencies originate from the fact that the number
of bidirectional conditionals MLMs can learn far
exceeds what is needed for constructing the joint
distribution. Given the recent evidence that MLMbased pretraining is a useful paradigm, we think
that resolving its inconsistency issue could be a necessary step for future work. While our inferencetime ensembling approach improves accuracy, it
can only be seen as a limited patch-up method
that only unite a certain number of selected conditionals. We believe that for long-term research,
this problem should be ideally addressed as part
of the expensive pretraining stage, for which our
experiment techniques and results can be seen as a
reference.
Such inconsistencies may remind readers of
GPT’s sensitivity to prompts (OpenAI, 2023). It’s
crucial to understand that those sensitivities refer
to inconsistencies in the space of semantics, which

1. The discussion in Section 2 only specified a
prerequisite for inconsistencies. As for why
such inconsistencies mechanistically form during training and how they might be mitigated
or avoided during training, we leave the research to future work.
2. Although we tested mid-sized MLMs such as
UL2-20B, it is no secret that some powerful
masked language models like U-PaLM and
PaLM2 are kept out of open access and they
might behave somewhat differently. We leave
diagnostics on those models for researchers
with access. We don’t expect the issue to completely disappear for those models.
3. Apart from pretraining, it has been shown
that paradigms like instruction tuning (Wei
et al., 2021) and reinforcing (Ouyang et al.,
2022) can improve the performance of language models. How those techniques interplay with the inconsistency phenomenon is
worth looking into.
Impact Statements

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach.

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance
the field of Machine Learning. There are many
potential societal consequences of our work, none
which we feel must be specifically highlighted here.

OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744.