SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY
Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation:
A Survey

Yuqi Fang, Pew-Thian Yap, Weili Lin, Hongtu Zhu, and Mingxia Liu
Abstract—Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) via deep learning has attracted appealing attention for tackling domain-shift
problems caused by distribution discrepancy across different domains. Existing UDA approaches highly depend on the accessibility of
source domain data, which is usually limited in practical scenarios due to privacy protection, data storage and transmission cost, and
computation burden. To tackle this issue, many source-free unsupervised domain adaptation (SFUDA) methods have been proposed
recently, which perform knowledge transfer from a pre-trained source model to unlabeled target domain with source data inaccessible.
A comprehensive review of these works on SFUDA is of great significance. In this paper, we provide a timely and systematic literature
review of existing SFUDA approaches from a technical perspective. Specifically, we categorize current SFUDA studies into two groups,
i.e., white-box SFUDA and black-box SFUDA, and further divide them into finer subcategories based on different learning strategies
they use. We also investigate the challenges of methods in each subcategory, discuss the advantages/disadvantages of white-box and
black-box SFUDA methods, conclude the commonly used benchmark datasets, and summarize the popular techniques for improved
generalizability of models learned without using source data. We finally discuss several promising future directions in this field.
Index Terms—Domain adaptation, source-free, unsupervised learning, survey.

F
I NTRODUCTION

D

EEP learning, based on deep neural networks with representation learning, has emerged as a promising technique and made remarkable progress over the past decade,
covering the field of computer vision [1], [2], medical data
analysis [3], [4], natural language processing [5], [6], etc. For
problems with multiple domains (e.g., different datasets or
imaging sites), the typical learning process of a deep neural
network is to transfer the model learned on a source domain
to a target domain. However, performance degradation is
often observed when there exists a distribution gap between
the source and target domains, which is termed “domain
shift” problem [7]–[9]. To tackle this problem, various domain adaptation algorithms [10], [11] have been proposed
to perform knowledge transfer by reducing inter-domain
distribution discrepancy. To avoid intensive burden of data
annotation, unsupervised domain adaptation has achieved
much progress [12]–[15]. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), unsupervised domain adaptation aims to transfer knowledge from a
labeled source domain to a target domain without accessing
any target label information.
Existing deep learning studies on unsupervised domain
adaptation highly depend on the accessibility of source data,
which is usually limited in practical scenarios due to the
following possible reasons. (1) Data privacy protection. Many
source datasets containing confidential information, such as
medical and facial data, are not available to third parties
due to privacy and security protection. (2) Data storage and
transmission cost. The storage and transmission of large-

•

Y. Fang, P.-T. Yap, W. Lin and M. Liu are with the Department of
Radiology and Biomedical Research Imaging Center, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States. H. Zhu
is with the Department of Biostatistics and Biomedical Research Imaging
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
Corresponding author: M. Liu (mxliu@med.unc.edu).

scale source datasets, such as ImageNet [16], could bring
much economic burden. (3) Computation burden. Training on
extremely large source datasets requires high computational
resources, which is not practical, especially in real-time
deployment cases. Thus, there is a high demand for sourcefree unsupervised domain adaptation (SFUDA) methods
that transfer a pre-trained source model to the unlabeled
target domain without accessing any source data [17]–[20].
Many promising SFUDA algorithms have been developed recently to address problems in the fields of object
recognition [21], semantic segmentation [22], image classification [23], object detection [24], face anti-spoofing [25],
etc. A comprehensive review of current studies on SFUDA
as well as an outlook on future research directions are
urgently needed. Liu et al. [26] present a review on data-free
knowledge transfer, where SFUDA only accounts for part of
the review and the taxonomy of SFUDA is generally rough.
And a large number of relevant studies have emerged in
the past year, but the related papers are not included in that
survey. In addition, their work does not cover commonly
used datasets in this research field.
To fill the gap, in this paper, we provide a timely
and thorough literature review of existing deep learning
studies on source-free unsupervised domain adaptation.
Our goal is to cover SFUDA studies of the past few years
and provide a detailed and systematic SFUDA taxonomy.
Specifically, we classify existing SFUDA approaches into
two broad categories: (1) white-box SFUDA as shown in
Fig. 1 (b) and (2) black-box SFUDA as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c).
The difference between them lies in whether the model
parameters of the pre-trained source model are available
or not. Based on different learning strategies they use, we
further subdivide white-box and black-box SFUDA methods
into finer categories, and the overall taxonomy is shown in
Fig. 2. Moreover, we discuss the challenges and insight for

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY
Source Model

Unlabeled Labeled
Target
Source
Data
Data

Source Model

API
UDA

UDA

UDA

Untunable Source Parameters

Tunable Source Parameters
(a) Conventional UDA

(c) Black-box SFUDA

(b) White-box SFUDA

Fig. 1. Illustration of (a) conventional unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), (b) white-box source-free UDA (SFUDA), and (c) black-box SFUDA.
Compared with (a) conventional UDA that relies on labeled source data {XS , YS } and unlabeled target data XT , (b, c) SFUDA performs knowledge
transfer by directly leveraging a pre-trained source model ΦS and unlabeled target data XT . The difference between (b) white-box SFUDA and (c)
black-box SFUDA lies in whether the learnable parameters of the source model ΦS are accessible or not. API: application programming interface.

Data Generation

White-Box SFUDA
Source-Free
Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation
(SFUDA)

Model Fine-Tuning

Domain Image Generation

Semi-Supervised Knowledge Distillation

Multi-Source/Target Domain Adaptation

Domain Alignment via Statistics

Test-Time Domain Adaptation

Contrastive Learning

Open/Partial/Universal-Set Domain Adaptation

Uncertainty-Guided Adaptation
Hidden Structure Mining

Self-Supervised Knowledge Distillation

Black-Box SFUDA

Future Outlook

Domain Distribution Generation

Pseudo-Label Denoising
Generative Distribution Alignment

Flexible Target Model Design
Cross-Modality Domain Adaptation
Continual/Lifelong Domain Adaptation
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation

Fig. 2. Taxonomy of existing source-free unsupervised domain adaptation (SFUDA) methods, as well as future outlook.

methods in each category, provide a comprehensive comparison between white-box and black-box SFUDA approaches,
summarize commonly used datasets in this field as well
as popular techniques to improve model generalizability
across different domains. We have to point out that SFUDA
is still under vigorous development, so we further discuss
the main challenges and provide insights into potential
future directions accordingly.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2
and Section 3 review existing white-box and black-box
SFUDA methods, respectively. In Section 4, we compare
white-box and black-box SFUDA and present useful strategies to improve model generalization. Section 5 discusses
challenges of existing studies and future research directions.
Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 6.

2 W HITE -B OX S OURCE -F REE
D OMAIN A DAPTATION

U NSUPERVISED

Denote ΦS as the source model well-trained based on the
labeled source domain {XS , YS }, where XS and YS represent source data and the corresponding label information,
respectively. Denote {XT } as the unlabeled target domain
with only target samples XT . The goal of SFUDA is to learn
a target model ΦT for improved target inference based on
the pre-trained source model ΦS and unlabeled target data
XT . In the setting of white-box source-free domain adaptation,
the source data (i.e., XS and YS ) cannot be accessed but the
training parameters of the source model ΦS are available. As
shown in the upper middle of Fig. 2, existing white-box
SFUDA studies can be divided into two categories: Data
Generation Method and Model Fine-Tuning Method, with
details elaborated as follows.

2.1
2.1.1

Data Generation Method
Domain Image Generation

Many studies aim to generate source-like image data and
achieve cross-domain adaptation by readily applying standard unsupervised domain adaptation techniques. Based
on different image generation strategies, these studies can
be divided into the following three subcategories: (1) batch
normalization statistics transfer, (2) surrogate source data
construction, and (3) generative adversarial network (GAN)
based image generation.
(1) Batch Normalization Statistics Transfer. Considering that batch normalization (BN) stores the running mean
and variance for a mini-batch of training data in each layer
of a deep learning model, some studies [27]–[29] explicitly
leverage such BN statistics for image style transfer, as illustrated in Fig. 3. For instance, Yang et al. [27] generate
source-like images via a two-stage coarse-to-fine learning
strategy. In the coarse image generation step, BN statistics
stored in the source model are leveraged to preserve the
style characteristics of source images and also maintain the
content information of target data. In the fine image generation step, an image generator based on Fourier Transform
is developed to remove ambiguous textural components
of generated images and further improve image quality.
With generated source-like images and given target images,
a contrast distillation module and a compact consistency
measurement module are designed to perform feature-level
and output-level adaptation, respectively. Similarly, Hou et
al. [28] perform style transfer by matching BN statistics of
generated source-style image features with those saved in
the pre-trained source model for image translation. Hong et
al. [29] generate source-like images by designing a stylecompensation transformation architecture guided by BN statis-

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

Target Data

Target Data

Source Model

UDA
Style Transfer via BN matching
& Content Preservation

Surrogate Source Data
Surrogate Source
Data Construction

UDA

Fig. 4. Illustration of Surrogate Source Data Construction methods for
source data generation. These methods first construct surrogate/proxy
source data by selecting appropriate samples from the target domain
and then perform standard unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA).

Noise
Source Model
Source-like Data

Fig. 3. Illustration of Batch Normalization Statistics Transfer methods
for source image generation. By matching batch normalization (BN)
statistics between the upper and lower branches, source-like data can
be generated by preserving the target content but with source style. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) can then be performed between
source-like data and target data.

tics stored in the source model and the generated reliable
target pseudo-labels.
(2) Surrogate Source Data Construction. To compensate
for the inaccessible source domain, some studies [30]–[34]
construct surrogate/proxy source data by selecting appropriate
samples from the target domain directly, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
For example, Tian et al. [30] construct pseudo source samples directly from the provided target samples under the
guidance of a designed sample transport rule. The adaptation
step and sample transport learning step are performed alternately to refine the approximated source domain and attain
confident labels for target data, thus achieving effective
cross-domain knowledge adaptation. Ding et al. [31] build a
category-balanced surrogate source domain using pseudolabeled target samples based on a prototype similarity measurement. During model adaptation, intra-domain and interdomain mixup regularizations are introduced to transfer
label information from the proxy source domain to the target
domain, as well as simultaneously eliminate negative effects
caused by noisy labels. Ye et al. [32] select target samples
with high prediction confidence to construct a virtual source
set that mimics source distribution. To align the target and
virtual domains, they develop a weighted adversarial loss
based on distribution and an uncertainty measurement to
achieve cross-domain adaptation. Moreover, an uncertaintyaware self-training mechanism is proposed to iteratively
produce the pseudo-labeled target set to further enhance
adaptation performance. Du et al. [33] construct a surrogate
source domain by first selecting target samples near the
source prototypes based on an entropy criterion, and then
enlarging them by a mixup augmentation strategy [35].
The adversarial training is then used to explicitly mitigate
cross-domain distribution gap. Yao et al. [34] simulate proxy
source domain by freezing the source model and minimizing a supervised objective function for optimization. For the
simulated source set, global fitting is enforced by a model
gradient based equality constraint, which is optimized by an
alternating direction method of multipliers algorithm [36].
(3) GAN-based Image Generation. Instead of approximating the source domain directly using existing target
data, Kurmi et al. [37] simulate the source data by training
a GAN-based generator, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Specifically,

they first use a parametric conditional GAN to generate labeled proxy source data by treating the source classifier as
an energy based function. Then, they learn feature patterns
that are invariant across two domains via standard adversarial learning for further adaptation. Hou et al. [38] also
update an image generator framework but they aim to translate
target images into the source-style ones instead of using the
latent noise as in [37]. In their method, the knowledge adaptation is achieved by training 1) a knowledge distillation loss
that mitigates the difference between features of newly generated source-style images and those of target images, and
2) a relation-preserving loss that maintains channel-level
relationship across different domains. Li et al. [39] propose a
GAN-embedded generator conditioned on a pre-defined label
to generate target-style data. By incorporating real target
samples, the learnable parameters of the generator and the
adapted model can be updated in a collaborative manner.
Moreover, two constraints, i.e., weight regularization and
clustering-based regularization, are utilized during model
adaptation to preserve source knowledge and ensure highconfident target prediction, respectively.
2.1.2 Domain Distribution Generation
Instead of generating source-like images directly, some studies propose to align feature prototypes or feature distribution of source data [40]–[44] with those in the target domain.
Specifically, Qiu et al. [40] generate feature prototypes for
each source category based on a conditional generator and
produce pseudo-labels for the target data. The cross-domain
prototype adaptation is achieved by aligning the features
derived from pseudo-labeled target samples to source prototype with the same category label via contrastive learning. Tian et al. [41] construct a virtual domain by simply sampling from an approximated gaussian mixture model
(GMM) to mimic unseen source domain distribution. In
terms of adaptation procedure, they reduce the distribution
gap between the constructed virtual domain and the target
domain via adversarial training, thus bypassing inaccessible
source domain. Their practice is based on the assumption
that the feature prototype of each category can be mined
from each row of the source classifier’ weights [45]. With
the same assumption, Ding et al. [42] leverage such source
classifier weights and reliable target pseudo-labels derived
by spherical k-means clustering to estimate source feature
distribution. After that, proxy source data can be sampled
from the estimated source distribution, and a conventional
domain adaptation strategy [46] is used to explicitly perform
cross-domain feature distribution alignment. Stan et al. [43],
[44] propose to first generate a prototypical distribution
representing the source data in an embedding feature space

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY
Pre-defined Label

GAN Generator

Generated
Source Data

Source Model
Target Data
Noise

UDA

Fig. 5. Illustration of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) based
Image Generation methods for source data generation. Typically, a predefined label and random noise act as the inputs of a GAN-based generator. By utilizing the pre-trained source model, they synthesize source
data for cross-domain adaptation. LCE : Cross-entropy loss function.

via GMM, and then perform source-free adaptation by
enforcing distribution alignment between source and target
domains via sliced Wasserstein distance [47].
2.1.3

Challenges and Insight

We classify existing domain image generation methods for
SFUDA into three subcategories. We present the challenges
of methods in each subcatetory and our insights below.
• Among the above-mentioned three subcategories, the first
one (i.e., batch normalization statistics transfer) explicitly
performs BN statistics matching between source and target domains for style transfer. Since the BN statistics
of the source model are off-the-shelf, these methods are
generally efficient and don’t require complex model training. However, BN statistics mainly focus on keeping the
style features while the content information cannot be
well preserved. Therefore, this strategy is more applicable
to scenarios where the contextual structure of images
between source and target domains does not differ too
much. It may not show good adaptation performance,
e.g., from a natural image to a cartoon image, since the
content information has significant changes. Note that BN
statistics transfer can also be used as a pre-processing step
in source-free domain adaptation, and it can be combined
with other strategies, e.g., circular learning [29], for more
effective knowledge transfer.
• Methods in the second subcategory (i.e., surrogate source
data construction) aim to approximate the proxy source
domain using appropriate target samples directly, followed by conventional unsupervised domain adaptation.
Their application is quite broad, including semantic segmentation [32], object recognition [31], [33], [34], image
classification [30], and digital recognition [30], [33]. In
general, methods in this group are straightforward and
computation-efficient by avoiding introducing extra hyperparameters, which is different from generative models.
However, because the proxy source samples are directly
selected from the target domain, these generated source
data may not effectively represent the original source
domain. Moreover, how to effectively select informative
target data for source data approximation is an important
topic to be investigated. Some studies have proposed various strategies for target data selection based on entropy
measurement [32], source prototype [31], [33], aggregated
source decision boundary [30], and equality constrained
optimization [34]. This is still an open but very interesting
future direction. For multi-source settings, it is promising
to study which source predictor(s) we should refer to for
effective target data selection.
• Methods in the third category (i.e., GAN-based image gen-

eration) typically synthesize images based on a generative
model. Since the generator can model underlying complex
distribution of source data with given random noise,
GAN-based models generally create more diverse images
compared with methods in second category (i.e., surrogate source data construction). However, these methods
introduce additional frameworks and learnable parameters (e.g., generators and discriminators), which may cost
more computation resources. By comparing experimental
results, we find the surrogate source data construction
methods [33], [34] generally outperform the GAN-based
generators [37], [39]. The possible reason may be that the
constructed source data in the former are closer to real
data distributions, while those recovered in GAN-based
methods usually suffer from a mode collapse problem [31]
that leads to low-quality images. Note that the mode collapse problem can be partly mitigated by using a carefully
tuned learning rate, manifold-guided training [48], and
virtual mapping [49], which is worth exploring further.
Different from image generation methods (Section 2.1.1)
that directly generate source/target-like images, the distribution generation methods (Section 2.1.2) generate feature prototype/distribution to achieve cross-domain feature
alignment. By comparing the reported experimental results,
we find that the distribution generation approaches [40]–
[42] usually outperform the GAN-based image generation
method [39]. And surrogate source data construction methods [31], [33] usually show superior performance compared
with the distribution generation methods [40], [41]. The
underlying reason could be that the source distributions
directly derived from the existing target data [31], [33] are
more accurate and stable than the approximated ones [40],
[41]. How to drive the approximated source distribution to
the real one can be further explored in the future.
2.2

Model Fine-Tuning Method

Instead of generating source-like data for standard unsupervised domain adaptation, many studies attempt to fine-tune
a pre-trained source model by exploiting unlabeled target
data in a self-supervised training scheme. Based on different strategies for fine-tuning the source model, we divide
existing studies into five subcategories: (1) self-supervised
knowledge distillation, (2) domain alignment via statistics,
(3) contrastive learning, (4) uncertainty-guided adaptation,
and (5) hidden structure mining methods, as shown in
Fig. 2. More details are introduced in the following.
2.2.1

Self-Supervised Knowledge Distillation

Many studies [23], [50]–[56] transfer knowledge learned
from source data to the target model via knowledge distillation in a self-supervised manner, as illustrated in Fig. 6. In
these works, most of them [23], [50]–[53] achieve source-free
domain adaptation via a mean-teacher scheme for knowledge
transfer [57], where the target model not only learns from
unseen target domain but also well preserves source model
information. For instance, Liu et al. [50] propose a selfsupervised distillation scheme for automatic polyp detection. By means of keeping output consistency of weak and

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

Teacher Network

Source Model

Stored Source
Statistics

Initialize

Aug-α
Target Data
EMA

LKD

Statistics Discrepancy
Minimization

Source Model

Target Data
Aug-β

Initialize

Target Model

Derived Target
Statistics

Student Network

Fig. 6. Illustration of Self-Supervised Knowledge Distillation methods
for source-free unsupervised domain adaptation. With target data from
different augmentations as inputs, a teacher-student framework is utilized to exploit target features, where parameters of teacher network are
usually exponential moving average (EMA) of those of student network.
Aug-α and Aug-β denote two data augmentation methods (e.g., flip,
rotation, shift, noise addition, distortion, etc), respectively. LKD : Knowledge distillation loss function.

strong augmented polyp images, source knowledge is implicitly transferred to the target model with a mean teacher
strategy [57]. Besides, a diversification flow paradigm is
designed to gradually eliminate the style sensitivity among
different domains, further enhancing model robustness towards style diversification. Yang et al. [51] also propose a
self-supervised mean-teacher approach for knowledge distillation, with a Transformer [58] embedded. This helps the
target model focus on object regions rather than less informative background in an image, thus improving model generalizability. Assuming that both source and target images
are generated from a domain-invariant space by adding
noise perturbations on each specific domain, Xiong et al. [52]
establish a super target domain via augmenting perturbations
based on original target domain. The super and original
target domains are fed into a mean-teacher framework,
with three consistency regularization terms (w.r.t. image,
instance, and class-wise) introduced for domain alignment.
Chen et al. [23] first divide the target data into clean and
noisy subsets guided by a computation loss and regard
them as labeled and unlabeled examples, and then utilize
the mean teacher technique to self-generate pseudo-labels
for the unlabeled target data for domain adaptation.
Instead of utilizing the conventional one-teacher onestudent paradigm, Liu et al. [53] construct a multi-teacher
multi-student framework, where each teacher/student network is initialized using a public network pre-trained on
a single dataset. Here, a graph is constructed to model the
similarity among samples, and such relationship predicted
by the teacher networks is used to supervise the student networks via a mean-teacher technique. Rather than leverage
the mean-teacher paradigm that averages student’s weights,
Yu et al. [54] propose to distill knowledge from teacher to
student networks by style and structure regularizations, as
well as physical prior constraints. Instead of employing a
teacher-student network as the studies mentioned above,
Tang et al. [55] achieve data-free adaptation through gradual
knowledge distillation. Specifically, they first generate pseudolabels via a constructed neighborhood geometry, and then
use pseudo-labels obtained from the latest epoch to supervise the current training epoch for knowledge transfer.

Fig. 7. Illustration of Domain Alignment via Statistics methods for
source-free unsupervised domain adaptation. The corresponding methods leverage batch statistics stored in the pre-trained source model
to approximate the distribution of inaccessible source data, and then
perform cross-domain adaptation by reducing distribution discrepancy
between source and target domains.

2.2.2 Domain Alignment via Statistics
Many studies [59]–[65] leverage batch statistics stored in the
pre-trained source model to approximate the distribution
of inaccessible source data, and then perform cross-domain
adaptation by reducing distribution discrepancy between
source and target domains, as demonstrated in Fig. 7. For
example, Ishii et al. [59] approximate feature distribution
of inaccessible source data by using batch normalization
statistics (mean and variance) saved in the pre-trained source
model. Then, Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence is utilized
to minimize the distributional discrepancy between source
and target domains, thus achieving domain-level alignment.
Inspired by [66], [67], Paul et al. [61] update the mean and
variance of BatchNorm [68] or InstanceNorm [69] of the
pre-trained model based on unseen target data. Not limited
to matching low-order batch-wise statistics (e.g., mean and
variance), Liu et al. [60] additionally incorporate high-order
batch-wise statistics, such as scale and shift parameters, to
explicitly keep cross-domain consistency. Moreover, they
quantify each channel’s transferability based on its interdomain divergence and assume that the channels with
lower divergence contribute more to domain adaptation.
Fan et al. [62] propose to align domain statistics adaptively by
modulating a learnable blending factor. By minimizing the
total objective function, each BN layer can dynamically obtain its own optimal factor, which controls the contribution
of each domain to BN statistics estimation. The methods
mentioned above are all based on Gaussian-based statistics
domain alignment, while Eastwood et al. [63] attempt to
align histogram-based statistics of the marginal feature distributions of the target domain with those stored in the
pre-trained source model, thus well extending adaptation
to non-Gaussian distribution scenarios.
2.2.3 Contrastive Learning
Many contrastive learning studies [19], [25], [70]–[73] perform data-free adaptation, which helps the target model
capture discriminative representations among unlabeled
target data. The main idea is to pull instances of similar
categories closer and push instances of different categories away
in feature space, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
For instance, Xia et al. [70] first adaptively divide target instances into source-similar and source-dissimilar sets,
and then design a class-aware contrastive module for crossset distribution alignment. The idea is to enforce the com-

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

Before Adaptation

After Adaptation

Updated
Target Data
Pull Close
Push Apart

Fig. 8. Illustration of Contrastive Learning methods for source-free unsupervised domain adaptation. These methods exploit discriminative
representations among unlabeled target data by pulling instances of
similar categories closer and pushing instances of different categories
away in feature space.

pactness of target instances from the same category and
reduce cross-domain discrepancy, thus prompting effective
knowledge transfer from the source model to target data.
Wang et al. [71] present a cross-domain contrastive learning
paradigm, which aims to minimize the distance between an
anchor instance from one domain and instances from other
domains that share the same category as the anchor. Due to
the unavailability of source data, they utilize source prototypical representations, i.e., weight vectors in the classifier
layer of a pre-trained source model, for feature alignment
across two domains. Huang et al. [19] tackle the data-free
domain adaptation by taking advantage of the historical
source hypothesis. Specifically, they propose a historical contrastive instance discrimination strategy to learn from target
samples by contrasting their learned embeddings generated
by the currently adapted and historical models. And they
also design a historical contrastive category discrimination
strategy to weight pseudo-labels of target data to learn
category-discriminative target representations, by calculating the consistency between the current and historical model
predictions. The two discrimination strategies help exploit
historical source knowledge, bypassing the dependence on
source data. Inspired by [74], Agarwal et al. [72] introduce
a pair-wise contrastive objective function to reduce intracategory distance and meanwhile increase inter-category
distance based on generated target pseudo-labels. They also
introduce robust source and target models by taking advantage of the generated adversarial instances, which facilitates
robust transfer of source knowledge to the target domain.
2.2.4
Uncertainty-Guided Adaptation

Uncertainty can measure how well the target model fits the
data distribution [75], and many studies [76]–[83] utilize
such valuable information to guide target predictions in
source-free adaptation scenarios (see Fig. 9).
For instance, Fleuret et al. [76] estimate uncertainty based
on differences between predicted outputs with and without
Dropout operation [84]. By minimizing such differences, the
prediction uncertainty on target data is reduced, meanwhile
the learnable feature abstractor can be more robust to noise
perturbations. Lee et al. [77] exploit aleatoric uncertainty by
encouraging intra-domain consistency between target images
and their augmented ones and enforcing inter-domain feature
distribution consistency. Chen et al. [78] introduce a prediction denoising approach for a cross-domain segmentation
task. In this study, a key component is introducing pixelwise denoising via uncertainty evaluation using Monte Carlo

Target Data XT

Target Model

Uncertainty Measurement
e.g., Monte Carlo Dropout,
Entropy, Confidence, Consistency

Fig. 9. Illustration of Uncertainty-Guided Adaptation methods for sourcefree unsupervised domain adaptation. These studies utilize uncertainty
to guide target predictions, and such valuable information can be measured by Monte Carlo Dropout, entropy, etc.

Dropout [85], [86], which calculates the standard deviation
of several stochastic outputs and keeps it under a manuallydesigned threshold. In this way, the noisy pseudo-labels
can be filtered out, helping improve pseudo-label quality
to achieve effective adaptation. Xu et al. [79] also propose an
uncertainty-guided pseudo-labeling denoising scheme, but
they use soft label correction instead of manually discarding
unreliable data points. Specifically, they first identify mislabeled data points by utilizing a joint distribution matrix [87],
[88], and then assign larger confident weights to those with
higher certainty based on Monte Carlo Dropout. Combining
target data and the corresponding rectified pseudo-labeling,
a commonly used cross-entropy objective function can be
leveraged for training the target model. Sharing the similar
idea, Hegde et al. [80] allocate lower weights for uncertain pseudo-labels, where the uncertainty is measured by
prediction variance based on Monte Carlo Dropout [85],
[86]. Considering that using Monte Carlo Dropout [85]
for uncertainty estimation requires manual hyperparameter
adjustment [89], Roy et al. [81] quantify source model’s uncertainty using a Laplace approximation [90], [91]. For model
training, they assign smaller weights to those target samples
that are farther away from source hypothesis (measured by
uncertainty), avoiding misalignment of dissimilar samples.
Pei et al. [82] tackle the uncertainty issue from the perspective of improving source model transferability. Specifically,
they estimate channel-aware transferability of the source
model to target data based on an uncertainty distance,
which measures the closeness between target instances and
source distribution. With the aim of dynamically exploiting
the source model and target data, the target model obtains
the source knowledge from the transferable channels and
neglects those less-transferable ones. Unlike previous studies, Li et al. [83] quantify uncertainty using self-entropy and
propose a self-entropy descent mechanism to seek the optimal
confidence threshold for robust pseudo-labeling of target
data. They also leverage false negative mining and mosaic
augmentation [92] to further eliminate the negative influence of noisy labels to enhance adaptation performance.
2.2.5 Hidden Structure Mining
Many studies [20], [93]–[99] take into consideration intrinsic
feature structures of target domain and update the target
model via clustering-aware pseudo-labeling. In Fig. 10, we
illustrate the main idea of hidden structure mining methods.
For example, Yang et al. [20] observe that target data can
intrinsically form a certain cluster structure that can be used
for domain adaptation. Specifically, they estimate affinity
among target data by taking into account the neighborhood
patterns captured from local-, reciprocal-, and expanded-

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

Before Adaptation

After Adaptation
Iteratively Update
Clustering Centroid
Target Data
Class Centroid

Fig. 10. Illustration of Hidden Structure Mining methods for source-free
unsupervised domain adaptation. These methods take into consideration intrinsic feature structures of target domain and iterate between
target model refinement and clustering centroid update.

neighbors. Source-free adaptation is achieved by encouraging consistent predictions for those with high affinity.
Similarly, Yang et al. [93] also exploit neighborhood structure information of target data. They propose a local structure clustering strategy to encourage prediction consistency
among k -nearest target features, thus pushing target data
with semantically similar neighbors closer. Tang et al. [94]
leverage semantic constraints hidden in geometric structure
among target data to encourage robust clustering based
on a cognition mechanism [100]. Source hypothesis transfer (SHOT) [95] and SHOT++ [96] attempt to mine the
feature structure of the target domain, but they cannot
fully exploit the meaningful context since the used selfsupervised pseudo-labeling does not take into account each
dimension’s covariance in the feature space. To address this
issue, Lee et al. [97] utilize GMM in the target domain to
obtain data structure, and design a joint model-data structure
score to concurrently exploit source and target knowledge.
Li et al. [98] utilize neighbor structure information from a
new aspect by proposing a generic and model smoothnessassisted Jacobian norm regularization term, which is used to
manipulate the consistency between each target instance
and its neighbors. This Jacobian norm regularizer can be
easily plugged into existing source-free domain adaptation
frameworks for boosting performance.
Different from the above mentioned methods, some
studies tackle source-free domain adaptation from other
perspectives. Li et al. [101] achieve data-free adaptation from
an adversarial-attack aspect, which aims to generate adversarial target instances by adding diverse perturbations to attack
the target model. Then, mutual information maximization is
performed between representations extracted by the source
and target model for the same target instance. The above
two steps are performed alternatively, by which the domaininvariant source knowledge can be preserved and the rich
target patterns can be well explored. Instead of exploring domain-invariant features for cross-domain knowledge
transfer, Wang et al. [102] mine domain-invariant parameters
stored in the source model. They assume that only partial
domain-invariant parameters of the source model contribute
to domain adaptation, and their goal is to capture such parameters while penalizing the domain-specific ones. Liang et
al. [103] explore source-free adaptation from the perspective of minimum centroid shift, with the aim of searching a
subspace where target prototypes are mildly shifted from
source prototypes. An alternating optimization scheme is
leveraged for model convergence and target pseudo-label
update. Inspired by maximum classifier discrepancy [14],
Yang et al. [104] introduce an auxiliary bait classifier for cross-
domain feature alignment combined with the source anchor
classifier. These two classifiers aim to collaboratively push
uncertain target representations to the correct side of the
source classifier boundary.
2.2.6 Challenges and Insight
We classify existing model fine-tuning methods for SFUDA
into five subcategories. The challenges of methods in each
subcatetory and our insights are presented below.
• The methods in the first subcategory, i.e., self-supervised
knowledge distillation, interpret source-free domain adaptation as a knowledge extraction and transfer process,
aiming to learn domain-invariant feature representations.
Most exiting studies transfer source knowledge to the
target model via a mean teacher strategy [57], where
teacher weights are an exponential moving average of
student weights. Hence, model parameters of both teacher
and student networks are tightly coupled, which may
lead to a performance bottleneck. A possible solution is to
introduce a dual-student framework and let one student
learn features flexibly, which may disentangle teacherstudent weights to some extent [105].
• The second subcategory, i.e., domain alignment via statistics,
leverages batch statistics stored in a pre-trained source
model to approximate distribution of inaccessible source
data. Compared with other categories, these statisticsbased methods are lightweight and prone to generalize to
other tasks, since they require only a few update steps of
batch-wise statistics parameters and are potentially applicable to real-time deployment [65]. However, they are not
suitable for problems that use deep network architectures
without batch normalization layers.
• The methods in the third subcategory, i.e., contrastive learning, aim to bring similar-class samples closer and push
dissimilar-class samples apart based on generated target pseudo-labels. Therefore, if the pseudo-labels contain
much noise, these methods may suffer from substantial
performance degradation. Moreover, a memory bank is
usually required to store the similarity relationship between current and historical feature representations of
target data, which could bring memory burden. It is
interesting to investigate the storage- and transmissionefficient contrastive learning strategies in source-free settings. In addition, several recent studies [106], [107]
have shown that data pair construction is crucial for
effective contrastive learning. One solution is utilizing
contrastive information between target data and their
augmented ones. Previous studies [108] often use either
strong or weak transformations for data augmentation,
where strong augmentations mostly distort the structures
of original images (e.g., shape distortion) while weak
augmentations usually limit transformations to preserve
the images’ structures (e.g., flip). Here we propose to
dynamically mix strong and weak augmentation of target
data, which may help learn more robust representations.
• The methods in fourth subcategory, i.e., uncertainty-guided
adaptation, focus on reducing prediction uncertainty of target data. Many studies [78], [79] use Monte Carlo Dropout
for uncertainty estimation, but this technique requires
specialized network architecture design and model training, bringing troublesome hyperparameter tuning [89]. A

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

recent study [78] points out that their method can only
handle problems with minor domain shift, and performs
poorly on problems with severe domain shift. It is interesting to explore this challenging problem in the future.
• The last subcategory, i.e., hidden structure mining, considers
intrinsic clustering structure of the target domain, assuming that geometric structure of target data may provide
informative context [94]. The advantage of these methods
is that no auxiliary frameworks are required, and thus,
they can be easily incorporated into other adaptation
frameworks. However, these methods have at least three
disadvantages. (1) Most existing studies need to iterate
between feature clustering and model update, which may
hinder training efficiency and cause a memory burden.
(2) These methods may be infeasible to handle extremely
large-scale datasets due to the difficulty of saving global
latent feature embeddings of the whole dataset [109].
(3) Most studies construct target geometric structures in
Euclidean space, which may not be suitable for problems
with non-Euclidean data such as graphs. Thus, how to
improve training efficiency and deal with the large-size
dataset, as well as mining geometry information of nonEuclidean data deserve further research.
From the application perspective, computation-efficient
approaches are more applicable for pixel-wise semantic
segmentation tasks, which require higher resources compared with classification tasks. And those memory-intensive
approaches such as contrastive learning may be not suitable
for semantic segmentations. Moreover, it is worth noting
that data generation methods detailed in Section 2.1 can
be used in conjunction with the model fine-tuning methods
described in this section. For instance, one can first generate
a virtual source domain by selecting appropriate target
samples, and thus a standard unsupervised domain adaptation framework could be applied. To further exploit target
information, we then take account of geometric structure of
target samples and generate corresponding target pseudolabels to fine-tune the target model. These two steps can be
optimized iteratively, helping generate more representative
source domain and refine the target model.

3 B LACK -B OX S OURCE -F REE
D OMAIN A DAPTATION

U NSUPERVISED

Different from white-box methods, in the setting of black-box
source-free domain adaptation, both the source data {XS , YS }
and detailed parameters of the source model ΦS are not accessible. Only the hard or soft model predictions of the target
data XT from the source model ΦS are leveraged for domain adaptation. Depending on the utilization of the blackbox predictor, the existing black-box SFUDA studies can
be mainly divided into three categories: Self-Supervised
Knowledge Distillation, Pseudo-Label Denoising, and
Generative Distribution Alignment methods, with details
introduced below.
3.1

Self-Supervised Knowledge Distillation

Some studies [110]–[115] construct a teacher-student-style
network architecture with knowledge distillation to translate the source knowledge to the target domain in a selfsupervised manner. For instance, Liang et al. [110], [111]
enforce output consistency between a source model (i.e.,
teacher) and a customized target model (i.e., student) via
a self-distillation loss. Specifically, a memory bank is first
constructed to store the prediction of each target sample
based on the black-box source model. This source model
then acts as a teacher to maintain an exponential moving
averaging of source and target prediction following [116],
[117]. Additionally, structural regularization on the target
domain is further incorporated during adaptation for more
effective knowledge distillation. Similarly, Liu et al. [112],
[113] employ an exponential mixup decay scheme to explicitly
keep prediction consistency of source and target domains,
thus gradually capturing target-specific feature representations and obtaining the target pseudo-labels. Xu et al. [114]
extend the teacher-student paradigm from image analysis
to more challenging video analysis, where not only spatial features but also temporal information are taken into
consideration during domain adaptation. For knowledge
distillation, the target model is regarded as a student, which
aims to learn similar predictions generated by a teacher (i.e.,
source) model. The teacher model is meanwhile updated
to maintain an exponential moving averaging prediction.
Instead of distilling knowledge between source and target
domains, Peng et al. [115] transfer knowledge between the
target network and its subnetwork in a mutual way, where
the subnetwork is a slimmer version generated from the
original target network following Yang et al. [118]. And
target features are extracted by leveraging multi-resolution
input images, helping improve the generalization ability of
the target network. Moreover, a novel data augmentation
strategy, called frequency MixUp, is proposed to emphasize task-related regions-of-interests while simultaneously
reducing background interference.
3.2

Pseudo-Label Denoising

Some studies [119], [120] tackle domain shift by carefully
denoising unreliable target pseudo-labels. For example,
Zhang et al. [119] combat noisy pseudo-labels via noise rate
estimation, which first preserves more training samples at
the start of the training process following [121] and then
gradually filters out the noisy ones based on their loss
values as training proceeds. The pseudo-labels are iteratively refined according to a category-dependent sampling
strategy, encouraging the model to capture more diverse
representations to improve model generalization ability. Different from Zhang et al. [119] that only select part of reliable
target data during model training, Luo et al. [120] take
into account all target data and rectify noisy pseudo-labels
from a negative learning aspect. Specifically, their approach
assigns complementary ground-truth labels for each target
sample, helping alleviate error accumulation for noisy prediction. Moreover, a maximum squares objective function is
utilized as confidence regularization to prevent the target
model from being trapped in easy sample training. Yang et
al. [122] incorporate pseudo-label denoising and self-supervised
knowledge distillation into a unified framework. Specifically,
domain knowledge is first distilled from the trained source
predictor to warm up the target model by an exponential
moving averaging scheme. The unlabeled target domain
is then split into two subsets (i.e., easy and hard groups)

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

according to their adaptation difficulty [123], and the MixMatch strategy [124] is leveraged to progressively exploit all
target representations. In this way, the noise accumulation
is further suppressed, thereby improving the efficacy of
pseudo-label denoising.
3.3

Generative Distribution Alignment

Different from the above methods, some studies perform
distribution alignment across domains in a generative way.
For instance, Yeh et al. [125] perform domain adaptation
by maximizing the lower bound in variational inference.
Specifically, they construct a generation path as well as an
inference path, where the generation path produces a prior
feature distribution derived from predicted category labels,
and the inference path approximates a posterior feature
distribution based on each target instance. The latent distribution alignment can be achieved by maximizing the evidence lower vound in variational inference for cross-domain
adaptation. Similarly, Yang et al. [126] also construct the
generation and inference paths, but they achieve adaptation
via minimizing the upper bound of the prediction error of
target data in variational inference. Zhang et al. [127] achieve
source-free adaptation by first building multiple source
models and then generating a virtual intermediate surrogate
domain to select target samples with minimum inconsistency
predicted by the source models. The knowledge transfer
is achieved by feature distribution alignment between the
virtual surrogate domain and the target domain based on a
joint probability maximum mean discrepancy [128].
3.4

Challenges and Insight

In this section, we classify existing black-box SFUDA methods into three categories based on how they utilize the noisy
target predictions. The challenges of each category and our
insights are presented below.
• The first category, i.e., self-supervised knowledge distillation,
aims to gradually transfer source knowledge to a customized target model by enforcing output consistency
between a teacher (source) and a student (target) network.
This learning strategy has also been used in white-box
SFUDA (see Section 2.2.1). The difference is that model
weights of student networks are accessible in white-box
SFUDA methods, but not in black-box SFUDA. In blackbox SFUDA, instead of leveraging any parameter details,
the teacher network is only updated by source predictions and historical target predictions. The two items are
typically weighted by a momentum factor, which helps
dynamically adjust their contributions. Self-supervised
knowledge distillation has shown promising performance
in object recognition [110], semantic segmentation [112],
and video action recognition tasks [114].
• The methods in the second category, i.e., pseudo-Label
denoising, tackle black-box SFUDA from the perspective of
noisy label rectification. It has shown that a pseudo-label
denoising approach [119] has inferior performance than
the self-supervised knowledge distillation method [110].
The reason may be that the former [119] only focuses on
noisy prediction itself while neglecting target data structure that is well considered in the latter [110]. Considering
that pseudo-label denoising methods can tackle unbalanced label noise via noise rate estimation, combining
pseudo-label denoising with self-supervised knowledge
distillation strategies will be a promising future direction, especially in class-imbalance scenarios. Moreover,
if the black-box predictor only provides one-hot hard
predictions instead of probability predictions, the utility
of methods in this subcategory will be greatly reduced.
The reason is that the noise rate cannot be well estimated
in practice, e.g., there is nearly no difference between the
output of [0.45, 0.55] and that of [0.05, 0.95] because the
source predictor produces the same output (i.e., [0, 1]).
• The third category, i.e., generative distribution alignment, attempts to perform domain adaptation by minimizing feature distribution discrepancy across the source and target
domains. Since source distribution is inaccessible in blackbox models, some generative approaches are utilized to
generate such reference distribution for target data to
align with, including variational autoencoder [125], [126]
and surrogate source domain construction [127]. These
methods are more suitbale for recognition/classification
tasks, but less suitable for semantic segmentation tasks.
For example, generating surrogate feature distribution of
an object (e.g., car) is usually easier than that of a semantic
scene (e.g., cityscape), since the latter contains different
objects and thus the pixel-wise neighborhood relationship
is difficult to model in practice.
Besides the strategies proposed above, it is also crucial
to build a general and robust black-box source model, with
which the target predictions tend to be more accurate.
To achieve that, one possible solution is augmenting the
diversity of source data (e.g., adding some perturbation)
before constructing the source model, which may eliminate
style discrepancy between two domains, thus improving the
generalization ability of the source model. Another solution
is using soft probability labels instead of hard one-hot
labels (e.g., [0, 1]) for model training, which prevents the
source model from being over-confident and helps enhance
its generalizability. Compared to white-box methods, there
are relatively few black-box SFUDA methods as well as
benchmark datasets, which needs to be further explored.
D ISCUSSION

In this section, we first compare the white-box and blackbox SFUDA methods and then summarize several useful
strategies to improve model generalizability. We also list
datasets commonly used in the field in Table 1.
4.1

Comparison of White-Box and Black-Box SFUDA

By comparing existing white-box and black-box SFUDA
methods, we have the following interesting observations.
• Compared with black-box SFUDA that cannot access any
source parameters, white-box SFUDA is capable of mining
more source knowledge (e.g., batch statistics) that facilitates more effective domain adaptation.
• White-box SFUDA methods may suffer from data privacy leakage problems [119]. For instance, Yin et al. [190]
reveal that raw data can be recovered based on source
image distribution via a deep inversion technique. Using

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY
TABLE 1
Commonly used datasets for evaluating the performance of source-free unsupervised domain adaptation (SFUDA) approaches.
Dataset
Digit Recognition
Digits-Five [129]
Semantic Segmentation
Segmentation datasets
Object Recognition
Office-31 [137]
Office-Home [138]
VisDA [139]
Office-Caltech-10 [140]
ImageCLEF-DA [141]
PACS [7]
DomainNet [129]
MiniDomainNet [145]
PointDA-10 [146]
Face Anti-Spoofing
Face datasets
LiDAR Detection
LiDAR datasets
Video Action Recognition
UCF-HMDBfull [157]
Sports-DA [160]
Daily-DA [160]
Traffic Sign Recognition
Sign datasets
Image Classification
VLCS [167]
Medical Data
BraTS2018 [171]
MMWHS [172]
Brain skull stripping [173]
Polyp segmentation
EEG MI Classification [127]
Prostate segmentation
Optic disc&cup segmentation
Autism diagnosis

Domain #

Instance #

Category #
215,695
MNIST [130], SVHN [131], USPS [132], MNIST-M [13], Synthetic Digits [13]
45,766

-

GTA5 [133], Cityscapes [134], SYNTHIA [135], NTHU [136]
4
4
4
4
4,652
15,500
280,000
2,533
2,400
9,991
600,000
140,000
33,067
65
10
7
126
Amazon, Webcam, DSLR
Artistic, Clip Art, Product, Real-World
Synthetic and real images
Amazon, DSLR, Webcam, Caltech10
Caltech-256 [142], ImageNet ILSVRC2012 [16], PASCAL VOC2012 [143], Bing [144]
Art painting, Cartoon, Photo, Sketch
Clipart, Infograph, Painting, Quickdraw, Real, Sketch
Clipart, Painting, Real, Sketch
ModelNet [147], ShapeNet [148], ScanNet [149]
7,130

-

Replay-Attack [150], OULU-NPU [151], CASIA-MFSD [152], MSU-MFSD [153]
158,510

-

Waymo [154], KITTI [155], nuScenes [156]
3
3,209
40,718
18,949
23
UCF101 [158], HMDB51 [159]
UCF10 [158], Sports-1M [161], Kinetics [162]
ARID [163], HMDB51 [159], Moments-in-Time [164], Kinetics [162]
151,839
Syn.Signs [165], GTSRB [166]
10,729
Caltech101 [168], LabelMe [169], SUN09 [170], VOC2007 [143]
2
4
2
4
40
2,718
682
411

2/4
Cross-disease (high and low grade glioma), cross-modality (T1, T1ce, T2, FLAIR)
Cross-modality (magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography)
NFBS [174], ADNI [175], dHCP [176]
CVC-ClincDB [177], Abnormal Symptoms [178], ETIS-Larib [179], EndoScene [180]
MI2-2 [181], MI2-4 [181], MI2015 [182], AlexMI [183]
NCI-ISBI 2013 Challenge [184], PROMISE12 challenge [185]
REFUGE [186], RIMONE-r3 [187], Drishti-GS [188]
NYU, USM, UCLA, and UM of ABIDE dataset [189]

a membership inference attack strategy [191], [192], it is
possible to infer whether a given sample exists or not
in training dataset, thereby revealing private information.
The black-box SFUDA can help protect data privacy because only application programming interface (API) is
accessible while detailed model weights are withheld,
but it may suffer from performance degradation of crossdomain adaptation.
• Most white-box SFUDA methods assume that model architecture is shared between source and target domains,
while the black-box SFUDA methods try to design taskspecific target models for knowledge transfer. Such flexible model design in black-box SFUDA methods is very
useful for target users with low computation resources,
since they can design more efficient and lightweight target
models for domain adaptation.
• Black-box SFUDA methods neither require data synthesis nor model fine-tuning, which helps to accelerate the
convergence process of model training. In contrast, whitebox methods are usually computationally intensive and
time-consuming. For instance, it is reported that the computational cost of a black-box SFUDA method [127] is
0.83s while that of two competing white-box methods
are 3.17s [95] and 22.43s [193], respectively, reflecting the
computation efficiency of black-box SFUDA.
In summary, when using white-box and black-box

Description

SFUDA methods, we have to make a trade-off between
obtaining better performance, protecting confidential information, and reducing computational and memory costs.
4.2

Useful Strategies for Improved Generalizability

To facilitate research practice in this field, we summarize
several useful techniques that could be used to improve the
generalizability of learning models for source-free unsupervised domain adaptation.
4.2.1

Entropy Minimization Loss

Most SFUDA methods utilize an entropy minimization
loss [194] to reduce uncertainty of model predictions [28],
[60], [76], [95], [112], [113], [195]–[201]. This simple yet
effective strategy encourages the model to generate one-hot
predictions for more confident learning.
4.2.2

Diversity Enforcing Loss

To prevent predicted labels from collapsing to categories
with larger number of samples, many studies leverage a
diversity enforcing loss to encourage diverse predictions
over target domain [81], [95], [196], [202]–[206] . The usual
practice is to maximize the entropy of empirical label distribution over the batch-wise average of model predictions.

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

4.2.3 Label Smoothing Technique
In source-free adaptation studies, a pre-trained source
model is generally obtained via training on labeled source
data before adaptation stages. Currently, many studies use
a label smoothing technique [207], [208] to produce a robust
source model [20], [31], [95], [102], [209], [210]. This technique aims to transform original training labels from hard
labels (e.g., 1) to soft labels (e.g., 0.95), which prevents the
source model from being over-confident, helping enhance
its generalization ability. Also, the experiments have shown
that label smoothing can encourage closer representations
of training samples from the same category [207]. With a
more general and robust source model, it is likely to boost
adaptation performance on target domain.
4.2.4 Model Regularization
Many regularization terms are utilized in existing SFUDA
methods by incorporating some prior knowledge. For instance, an early learning regularization [40], [121], [211] is
used to prevent the model from over-fitting to label noise. A
stability regularization [39], [212]–[214] is leveraged to prevent parameters of the target model to deviate from those
of the source model. A local smoothness regularization [39],
[215] is used to encourage output consistency between the
target model and its noise-perturbed counterpart, helping
improve robustness of the target model. A mixup regularization [31], [110], [115], [216], [217] is used to enforce prediction consistency between original and augmented data,
which can mitigate the negative influence of noisy labels.
4.2.5 Confidence Thresholding
Many studies leverage pseudo-labeling to train the target model in a self-supervised way. Instead of utilizing a
manually-designed threshold to identify reliable/confident
pseudo-labels, a commonly used strategy is automatically
learning the confidence threshold for reliable pseudo-label
selection [218]. To further tackle the class-imbalance problem, some studies [76], [79], [213], [219], [220] propose to
learn dynamic threshold for each category, which provides
a fair chance for categories with limited samples to generate
pseudo-labels for self-training.
F UTURE O UTLOOK

5.1

Multi-Source/Target Domain Adaptation

To utilize diverse and rich information of multiple domains,
a few studies [30], [193], [205], [221], [222] propose multisource data-free adaptation to transfer source knowledge
to the target domain. Tian et al. [30] introduce a sample
transport learning method, but the proposed model is shallow, and thus cannot handle highly nonlinear feature extraction. To tackle this problem, several deep learning based
models [193], [205] are proposed. But they ignore the fact
that the generated target pseudo-labels may be noisy, which
may cause training bias when matching target domains with
large domain gaps. The key to solving problems with multisource domains is quantifying the transferability of different
source models and utilizing their complementary information for promoting cross-domain adaptation. Even several
strategies are proposed (e.g., aggregation weight [193] and
source-specific transferable perception [205]), more explorations are encouraged to address the problem of negative
transfer during cross-domain knowledge transfer.
A few studies [223]–[227] incorporate federated learning
into domain adaptation scenarios. Federated learning [228]–
[230] is a decentralized scheme to facilitate collaborative
learning among multiple distributed clients without sharing training data or model parameters. The constraint that
prevents data and parameter transmission across different
source domains is not required in multi-source-free domain
adaptation. For instance, federated adversarial domain adaptation (FADA) introduced by Peng et al. [223] is among the
first attempts to propose the concept of federated domain
adaptation, which employs a dynamic attention mechanism to transfer knowledge from multi-source domains to
an unlabeled target domain. In this method, each source
model needs to synchronize with the target domain after
each training batch, resulting in huge computation costs
and potential risk of privacy leakage [231]. To tackle this
problem, Feng et al. [224] introduces a consensus focus
schema that greatly improves communication efficiency for
decentralized domain adaptation. Moreover, Song et al. [226]
utilize a homomorphic encryption approach for privacy protection, and Qin et al. [227] introduce a flexible uncertaintyaware strategy for reliable source selection. However, current federated learning studies usually produce a common
model for all clients without considering heterogeneity of
data distribution of different clients. Therefore, the common
model cannot adapt to each client adaptively, which may
affect adaptation performance. It would be very interesting
to investigate personalized federated learning [232], with
which current or new clients can easily adapt to their
own local dataset by performing a few optimization steps.
Besides, all the methods mentioned above require labeled
data from multiple sources to train a federated model, inevitably increasing annotation costs. Therefore, approaches
that effectively exploit unlabeled data from multiple source
domains in a decentralized way are urgently needed.
On the other hand, Yao et al. [233] and Shenaj et al. [234]
have proposed several federated multi-target domain adaptation strategies for transferring knowledge of a labeled
source server to multiple unlabeled target clients. More advanced techniques for federated multi-target domain adaptation are highly desirable, by considering computation
and communication cost, annotation burden, and privacy
protection of different target domains.
5.2

Test-Time Domain Adaptation

Most SFUDA approaches require pre-collected unlabeled
target data for model training, termed “training-time adaptation”. Test-time adaptation [198], [235]–[238] has been
investigated by adapting the source model to the target
domain during inference procedure only. The advantages of
test-time adaptation are mainly twofold: (1) The adaptation
process does not need iterative training, which greatly improves computational efficiency, so the model can be easily
deployed in an online manner. (2) Without relying on target
training data, test-time adaptation is expected to be well
generalized to diverse target domains. Even current studies
have made promising achievements, there are still some
problems worth exploring, listed as follows.

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY

Some studies [198], [239], [240] need to access batchsized (>1) target samples during inference, which cannot handle scenarios where target samples arrive one-byone sequentially. Two studies [241], [242] perform imagewise adaptation rather than batch-wise adaptation, but they
cannot deal with cases with large distribution shift. It is
interesting to explore how to handle the scenarios where
test instances come from continuous changeable domains
in the future. Additionally, the solutions on how to adaptively exploit test data can be further explored [243], such
as adjusting model weights dynamically based on sample
discrepancy across domains.
5.3

Open/Partial/Universal-Set Domain Adaptation

This survey focuses on close-set source-free domain adaptation, where the label space of source and target domains is
consistent. But practical scenarios are much more complicated when the category shift issue occurs across different
domains. There are three non-close-set scenarios: (1) open-set
(Cs ⊂ Ct ) problems, (2) partial-set (Cs ⊃ Ct ) problems, and
(3) universal-set (Cs \Ct 6= ∅ and Ct \Cs 6= ∅, Cs ⊂ Ct ,
Cs ⊃ Ct ) problems, where Cs and Ct denote the category
label set for source and target domains, respectively.
Currently, only a few studies [18], [244], [245] attempt
to handle the category shift problem in source-free adaptation scenarios, including out-of-distribution data construction [18], [244], neighborhood clustering learning [246],
uncertainty-based progressive learning [247], and mutual
information maximization [204]. The main idea behind these
studies is to recognize out-of-source distribution samples
and improve generalization ability of the source model.
However, the model performance of existing studies is
not quite satisfactory due to the inaccessibility of valuable
category-gap knowledge. One possible solution is to adaptively learn a threshold instead of using a fixed one to
determine the acceptance/rejection of each target sample
as a “known” category via some similarity measurement.
Moreover, some strategies used in non-source-free domain
adaptation can also be borrowed, such as distribution
weighted combining rule [248], category-invariant representation learning [249], one-vs-all learning scheme [250], and
global-local optimization [251].
5.4

Flexible Target Model Design

For black-box SFUDA methods, due to unavailability of
structure and parameters of target model, one usually has
to manually design a target model. For instance, Liu et
al. [112] choose a U-Net based framework as the target
model for segmentation. However, such manually designed
architectures may be not suitable when adapting to the target domain. It is expected that the automatic design of target
models, e.g., using neural architecture search (NAS) [252]–
[254], helps improve the learning performance. Considering that NAS has recently become a popular strategy for
searching proper network architectures in deep learning, we
can integrate it into SFUDA scenarios to find more proper
and efficient target models. And how to balance the search
space and search cost of network parameters can be further
investigated. Moreover, hyperparameters used in NAS (e.g.,
optimizer strategy, weight decay regularization) should be
carefully considered since they also have a significant impact on network performance [255].
5.5

Cross-Modality Domain Adaptation

Existing studies mainly focus on one single modality for
domain adaptation, while a few studies perform crossmodality adaptation in source-free settings [29], [256]. For
instance, for medical data analysis, the acquisition expense
of computed tomography (CT) scans is generally less than
that of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, hence it
may greatly reduce annotation cost for a segmentation task
when transferring a source model trained on CT images to
MRI scans [29]. Moreover, in computer vision field, it would
be promising to investigate cross-modality adaptation in
the future, e.g., image→video, which aims to achieve video
recognition based on the source model trained on the image
dataset. Also, how to effectively integrate multi-modality
(e.g., image, sound, text, and video) data for domain adaptation in a source-free way is an interesting but not yet widely
studied problem.
5.6

Continual/Lifelong Domain Adaptation

Most current studies focus on improving adaptation performance on the target domain while neglecting the performance on source domain, running the risk of catastrophic
forgetting problems [257]. To address this issue, several
solutions have been developed from different aspects, such
as domain expansion [258], historical contrastive learning [19], domain attention regularization [93], and model
perturbation [259], while there is still massive room for
performance improvement. Inspired by continual/lifelong
learning [260]–[263], continual domain adaptation has recently made great progress by investigating gradient regularization [264], iterative neuron restoration [265], buffer
sample mixture [266], etc. The continual domain adaptation
in source-free settings for mitigation of catastrophic forgetting remains an underdeveloped topic that can be further
explored in the future.
5.7

Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation

Source-free domain adaptation in semi-supervised settings
(i.e., with a few labeled target data involved for model training) has also been explored in recent years [197], [267], [268].
It usually performs semi-supervised adaptation with the
help of active learning [269], [270], model memorization revelation [271], and consistency and diversity learning [272].
There is still a lot of space for improvement with a limited
number of labeled target samples, e.g., by fine-tuning the
current source-free adaptation frameworks, but this is not
the focus of this survey.
C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we provide a comprehensive review of recent
progress in source-free unsupervised domain adaptation
(SFUDA). We classify existing SFUDA studies into whitebox and black-box groups, and each group is further categorized based on different learning strategies. The challenges
of methods in each category and our insights are provided.

SOURCE-FREE UNSUPERVISED DOMAIN ADAPTATION: A SURVEY
We then compare white-box and black-box SFUDA methods, discuss effective techniques for improving adaptation
performance, and summarize commonly used datasets. We
finally discuss promising future research directions. It is
worth noting that the research topic of source-free unsupervised domain adaptation is still in its early stages, and
we hope this survey can spark new ideas and attract more
researchers to advance this high-impact research field.

[20]