DEPRESSION DIAGNOSIS AND ANALYSIS VIA MULTIMODAL MULTI-ORDER FACTOR
FUSION
Chengbo Yuan† , Qianhui Xu† and Yong Luo†
†

Wuhan University, {michael.yuan.cb,xuqianhui,luoyong}@whu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Depression is a leading cause of death worldwide, and the diagnosis of depression is nontrivial. Multimodal learning is a
popular solution for automatic diagnosis of depression, and
the existing works suffer two main drawbacks: 1) the highorder interactions between different modalities can not be
well exploited; and 2) interpretability of the models are weak.
To remedy these drawbacks, we propose a multimodal multiorder factor fusion (MMFF) method. Our method can well
exploit the high-order interactions between different modalities by extracting and assembling multi-order factors across
modalities under the guide of a shared latent proxy. We
conduct extensive experiments on two recent and popular
datasets, E-DAIC-WOZ and CMDC, and the results show that
our method achieve significantly better performance compared with other existing approaches. Besides, by analyzing
the process of factor assembly, our model can intuitively show
the contribution of each factor. This helps us understand the
fusion mechanism.
Index Terms— Depression, multimodal learning, factor
fusion, multi-order.
1. INTRODUCTION
Depression is a common and serious mental disorder disease
around the world. It is estimated that about 3.8% of the population is affected by the disease, and more than 700, 000 patients die of suicide every year due to depression, according
to the statistics of world health organization (WHO). Due to
the exhaustive consumption of human resources and heavy
dependence of subject judgement of the traditional diagnosis approaches, there is an increasing interests in utilizing
machine learning for automatic diagnosis of depression, and
multimodal learning is one of the most popular solutions.
The existing multimodal learning works either focus on
improving the feature extraction for different modalities, or
designing better fusion strategies. To extract features for
long-time sequential data, some classical models such as
LSTM and CNN are adopted in [1, 2, 3], while more recent approaches employ transformer to alleviate the forgeting
problem caused by the long duration of patient interview [4].
In regard to the modality fusion, in addition to the simple

concatenation, attention mechanism is applied to adjust the
modality contribution [5]. Some other approaches, such as
CubeMLP [6] and Multi-Agent [7] can exploit more complex
interactive relationships between different modalities. Although have achieved certain success, these approaches suffer
from two main drawbacks: 1) lack of exploitation of differentorder interactions across modalities; and 2) the realtively low
interpretability, which leads to the confusion of the fusion
mechanism.
To remedy these drawbacks, we propose a Multimodal
Multi-order Factor Fusion method (MMFF) based on modality multi-order factor extraction and assembly. The idea of
MMFF is to first extract multi-order factors across different
modalities and then integrate the factors in terms of different orders for final prediction. The whole process is under
the guidance of a shared subspace proxy, which is utilized to
generate adaptive weights for modality factor fusion at different orders. The learned weights can intuitively show the
contribution of each factor in the fusion process. Besides,
we extract features for the long time sequential data (such as
videos and audios) from a new perspective based on trajectory
preservation, where a novel frame selection pipeline based on
the principal component analysis (PCA) and Midimax algorithm is developed. This helps us to effectively select the key
frames and compress the time series.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel multimodal multi-order factor fusion (MMFF) method for the diagnosis of depression.
The proposed method is able to exploit the modality
interactions at different levels of orders.
• We design a latent proxy to generate adaptive weights
for different modality factors (and also different orders). This improves the interpretability of our model
since the contribution of each factor can be identified
at different levels of orders. This enables the fusion
mechanism analysis.
• We develop a novel method to select key frames for
long time sequential data by integrating the PCA and
Midimax algorithm.
The experiments are conducted on two recent datasets:
the Extended Distress Analysis Interview Corpus (E-DAIC-

Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed Multimodal Multi-order Factor Fusion (MMFF) method. Specifically, our MMFF contains
two main parts: 1) a latent space construction module based on the encoder-decoder mechanism to extract a proxy, which is
utilized to generate adaptive weights to fuse different modality factors; 2) a multi-order combination part that applies multiple
encoders to generate factors, and integrate them under the guidance of the shared-subspace proxy at different levels of orders.
WOZ) [1, 8] and the Chinese Multimodal Compression Corpus (CMDC) [9]. The results demonstrate that our MMFF
is superior to the state-of-the-art approaches with significant
improvements.
2. THE PROPOSED METHOD
Figure 1 is an illustration of the overall structure of the
proposed Multimodal Multi-order Factor Fusion (MMFF)
method. In this section, we first introduce the feature extractors for different modalities, where a novel frame selection pipeline is developed. Then an encoder-decoder module
is utilized to construct a proxy to generate adaptive weights
for combination. Finally, the factors extracted from different
modalities are integrated at different levels of orders, and the
integrated representations are further adaptively fused for final prediction.
2.1. Feature Extraction
In this paper, we use a classic sentence to vector (sent2vec)
encoder, the Universal Sentence Encoder [10] together with
BiLSTM at the sentence level [11] to extract the textual features for the patient’s interview. We use the pretrained USE
to extract the sentence embedding, and then apply a two-layer
BiLSTM and three-layer MLP to extract the features.
In regard to the audio and video inputs, we utilize the
low-variance filtering, PCA and Midimax algorithms together

Fig. 2. The proposed frames feature extractor. Low variance
filter is firstly used to remove the insignificant feature. Then,
the Midimax algorithm is applied to the first principle component of the original feature to acquire the key frames.

with a two-layer BiLSTM to extract the features. The process
is illustrated in Figure 2, where the original features for each
video frame are extracted following [1, 8] for the E-DAICWOZ dataset. For the CMDC dataset, the original feature is a
stacking of the 12 feature vectors, each corresponds to a certain question in the interview. Since the number of frames in
each video or audio sequence may be very large (such as in the
E-DAIC-WOZ dataset), the computational cost may be very
high and there may be much redundant information. Therefore, we process these original features using the following
strategy.
Firstly, low-variance filtering is performed on the original feature. Suppose that the original feature after minmax normalization is {XiK×Mi = [Xi1 , Xi2 , · · · , XiMi ], i =

Fig. 3. The Midimax Algorithm (δ=6). To preserve the original trajectory, the maximum, minimum and median are picked
up for each time slice under the given compression ratio.
1, 2...N }, where N is the size of training set, Xij is the jth frame of i-th sample, K is the feature dimension of the
frame, Mi is the number of frames in Xi , and let Xij =
j2
jK T
[xj1
i , xi , · · · , xi ] , then the k-th dimension of features that
satisfies the following condition is filtered:
M
N
1 X 1 Xi jk
(x − Ej [xjk
i ]) ≤ β,
N i=1 Mi j=1 i

(1)

where β is an hyperparameter (we set β = 0.01 in this paper).
2
PMi  jk
is the variance of
Specifically, M1i j=1
xi − Ej [xjk
]
i
Xi at the k th dimension. After the low variance filtering,
some redundant features are removed.
Then we compress the sequence based on variance extraction and the Midimax algorithm. The main idea of Midimax
algorithm is to keep the trajectory of sequence as much as
possible under the premise of satisfying a certain compression ratio. Considering that Midimax is mainly applicable
to one-dimensional data, we first perform the maximum variance projection of features. That is, we use the PCA algorithm
to extract one principal component to transform the sequence
to one-dimension, and then apply Midimax to the projected
sequence.
The following is a brief description of the Midimax algorithm we apply: given the compression ratio δ, which is an
integer, we first divide the sequence into [s1 , s2 ...sN s ], where
N s is the number of time slices, si is the ith slice, and the
length of each time slice is δ. Let si = [s1i , s2i ...sδi ], and
suppose that the index of the maximum, minimum and median in the time slice are p1 , p2 , p3 . Then we sort [p1 , p2 , p3 ]
as [q1 , q2 , q3 ] (q1 ≤ q2 ≤ q3 ) and finally compress si into
[sqi 1 , sqi 2 , sq3
i ]. The scheme is shown in Figure 3. Finally, BiLSTM is applied to extract the features.
2.2. Proxy Construction
In factor fusion, we need to calculate the factor contributions for each modality. Considering that the calculation of
factor contribution should be consistent, we first map three
modalities into a common low-dimensional subspace, which
is learned by reconstructing the inputs with minimum errors.
That is, in order to make the new subspace effectively represent the original space, a reverse projection is conducted to

Fig. 4. Illustration of the latent space module for proxy extractor. The encoder-decoder form is adopted to maximize
the sharing between modality subspace while preserving the
modality information.
map the subspace back to the original space, and employ the
mean square error (MSE) of the recovery space and the original space as the loss function, as illustrated in Figure 4.
Formally, let xt , xa , xv be the extracted features for the
textual, audio and visual modalities respectively, we learn a
mapping function F (·), and the subspace mapping can be expressed as:
ymod = Fmod (xmod ), mod = {t, a, v},
z = (yt + ya + yv ),
(2)

where the dimension of ymod and the latent representation z
is less than xmod . The latent subspace is learned by using the
following loss function:
Llatent =
3

X

(x̂mod − xmod )2 ,

mod∈{t,a,v}

(3)
x̂mod = Fmod
(z).

The learned z is utilized as a proxy to guide the subsequent
factor fusion.
2.3. Factor Extraction & Assembly
There are many approaches for multimodal fusion, but most
of them have two main issues: the incomplete exploitation
of the interactive information across modalities and low interpretability. Our MMFF model alleviates these issues by
exploiting multi-order interactions between different modalities in the combination, which also provides a certain degree
of interpretability for fusion mechanism analysis.
The factor fusion process at different levels of orders is
illustrated in Figure 5. First, the features of each modality
are decomposed into factors of different orders. where the porder factor indicates that the factor comes from p modalities.
Then for the p-order factor, there will be C3p subfactors, where
C3p is the combination number. How to extract each factor
will be depicted as follows.
Let mod denote a single modality, com signifies modality
combination, and H(·) be a certain mapping function, we first

the contribution of each order, and then weightedly fuse the
integrated factors to obtain the final feature v:
v = γ1 v 1 + γ2 v 2 + γ3 v 3 .

(9)

Here,
γ = [γ1 , γ2 , γ3 ]T = Hcom (z), s.t.
X

γi = 1.

(10)

i=1

Fig. 5. The proposed contribution decomposition methodology. The core idea is to decompose the interaction gain to all
modality combination explicitly, so that the fully coverage of
interaction extraction is assured.
calculate the contribution of each modality for the factors of
different levels of orders. This is achieved by using the constructed proxy to generate the adaptive weights. Specifically:
γ k = Hk (z), k = 1, 2, 3,
T
vta
= Pta
σ(γt2 Gt2 (xt ) ◦ γa2 Ga2 (xa )),

(6)
T
vtv
= Ptv
σ(γt2 Gt2 (xt ) ◦ γv2 Gv2 (xv ))

where σ(·) is a certain activation function and ◦ is the
Hadamard product. Then the MLB approach is extended to
induce the 3rd-order factor:
T
vtav
= Ptav
σ(γt3 Gt3 (xt ) ◦ γa3 Ga3 (xa ) ◦ γv3 Gv3 (xv )).

(7)

We then combine the obtained subfactors at different levels
of orders. The integrated 1st-order factor v 1 , 2nd-order factor
v 2 and 3rd-order factor v 3 are obtained by simply adding the
subfactors and then performing a projection, i.e.,
v 1 = P1T (vt1 + va1 + vv1 ),
2
v 2 = P2T (vta
+ vav
+ vtv
),

v
1 X
(ŷ − y)2 .
N i=1

(11)

Through the adaptive training of the contributions γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3
and γ, we can intuitively acquire the importance of each factor
of modality in the combination, so as to better understand the
mechanism of fusion.

(5)

T
where Pmod
is a projection matrix, G(·) is an encoder and
γmod is the contribution of certain modality at the 1st-order.
Given the contribution γmod
for each modality at the 2ndorder, we use the multimodal low-rank bilinear (MLB) approach [12] to construct the 2nd-order factor, i.e.,
T
vav
= Pav
σ(γa2 Ga2 (xa ) ◦ γv2 Gv2 (xv )),

N

LM SE =

(4)

where γ k = [γtk , γak , γvk ]T , which satisfies γtk + γak + γvk = 1.
The 1st-order factor vmod
, mod ∈ {t, a, v}, is calculated as
follows:
1
T
vmod
= γmod
Pmod
Gmod
(xmod ), mod = {t, a, v},
For our MMFF, A hierarchical training strategy is
adopted. That is, we first train the latent subspace solver, and
then freeze its parameters, and finally train the backbone of
our MMFF. After obtaining the final fusion feature v, we use
a three-layers MLP to predict patients’ PHQ score. Let ŷ be
the prediction score, y be the real label, and the loss function
used in our training process is the MSE loss function, i.e.,

(8)
= P3T vtav
.

The final fusion feature is composed of all the 1st, 2nd
and 3rd-order factors. Similarly, we use the proxy to calculate

3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Dataset
Our experiments are mainly conducted on two recent depression diagnosis datasets, namely, the Extended Distress Analysis Interview Corpus (E-DAIC-WOZ) [1, 8] and Chinese Multimodal Compression Corpus (CMDC) [9].
E-DAIC-WOZ is an extended version of WOZ-DAIC
dataset[8], and it is also the dataset for the AVEC2019 DDS
Challenge [1]. E-DAIC-WOZ provides video, audio and text
modality data. For the text modality, the interview records
are provided. For the video modality, only the extracted features are provided to protect the privacy of patients. For audio modality, in addition to the wav file, some features are
also provided. The dataset contains 163 training samples, 56
validation samples and 56 test samples.
CMDC is a newly proposed dataset, which is collected by
[9]. This dataset was obtained from the audio-visual records
of patients’ clinical interviews in the Chinese environment.
CMDC presets 12 questions during the interview and stores
the answering data for these 12 questions. Similarly, in order to ensure the privacy of patients, the datasets only provided extracted features in the audio and video modalities.
The dataset consists of 45 samples that have complete modalities: 19 samples for patients with depression and 26 samples
for the control group. Considering the relatively small amount
of data, the author provides a stratified 5-fold cross validation
to obtain the final performance of the model.

3.2. Experiment Setup
Our experimental settings are as follows: the activation function for both the audio and video modalities are ELU(·), and
the activation function for the text modality is ReLU(·). In
the factor fusion part, F (·) is a two-layer MLP with Tanh activation, G(·) is a single-layer MLP with Hardtanh activation,
and H(·) is a three-layer MLP with ReLU activation. In order
to alleviate the over-fitting problem, we use the AdamW optimizer for training, and add the Dropout layer to the network
backbone. The dropout rate is set between [0.4, 0.6].
For the E-DAIC-WOZ dataset [1, 8], we follow the data
partition in AVEC2019 DDS. We use Midimax to compress
the length of video and audio feature to 1200 and 600 respectively, and unit normalization is conducted on the compressed
results. For the CMDC dataset [9], we first remove the data
with incomplete modalities as described in Zou et al.[9], and
then divide the remaining data into five folds according to the
stratified partition provided in the CMDC attached file. Then,
for the non-test data in each fold, we randomly take 80% data
as the training set, and set the remaining data as the validation set. The model is evaluated based on the combination of
prediction scores from five folders.
In the AVEC2019 DDS [1], CCC (concordance correlation coefficient) and RMSE (the root mean square error) are
the main evaluation metrics. To test the effectiveness of our
model, we add the MAE (mean absolute error) as an extra
criterion. For the CMDC dataset, we follow [9] to adopt the
RMSE, MAE and Pearson correlation coefficients as the evaluation criteria.

3.3. Experimental Results
The results on the E-DAIC-WOZ [1, 8] dataset are reported
in Table 1. From the results, we observe that: 1) after lowvariance filtering and Midimax processing, our model obtains
CCC=0.434 and RMSE=5.44 using only the audio modality.
This is a competitive result, which verifies the effectiveness of
our Midimax sequence compression; 2) the proposed MMFF
achieves the performance of CCC=0.676, RMSE=4.91, and
MAE=3.98. It can be seen that our model achieves the best
performance on the most popular evaluation metric CCC, and
ranked first and third in terms of M AE and RM SE respectively. This demonstrates the superiority of our method.
The results on the CMDC dataset are reported in Table
2. In the experiments of Zou et al. [9], the combination including the audio modality achieves better performance compared with others. This is in line with the results in our experiments. The performance of audio modality is surprisingly
good. By applying low variance filtering, normalization and
2-layer BiLSTM, utilizing only the audio modality can outperform [9]. By combining the different modalities using our
MMFF method, the performance can be further improved.

Table 1. Result on E-DAIC-WOZ Test Set, where the best
results are marked in bold, “(T)” and “(A)” indicate that the
model only uses the corresponding modality. If not specified,
all modalities are utilized.
Model
Baseline [1]
Adaptive Transformer [4]
Bert-CNN & Gated-CNN [2]
VarFilter+Midimax (Ours) (A)
Hierarchical BiLSTM [13]
DepressNet [5]
multi-DAAE+Fusion [11]
PV-DM [11] (T)
CubeMLP [6]
MMFF (Ours)

CCC
0.111
0.331
0.403
0.434
0.442
0.457
0.528
0.560
0.583
0.676

RMSE
6.37
/
6.11
5.44
5.50
5.36
4.47
4.66
/
4.91

MAE
/
6.22
/
4.4
/
/
/
/
4.37
3.98

Table 2. Result on CMDC Test Set, where the best results are
marked in bold; “(A)” and “(A+T)” indicate that the model
only uses the corresponding modalities. If not specified, all
modalities are utilized.
Model
SVR
KNN
BiLSTM [9]
MulT [9]
MulT [9] (A+T)
VarFilter+2BiLSTM (Ours) (A)
MMFF (Ours)

Perason
0.57
0.50
0.68
0.72
0.72
0.81
0.83

RMSE
7.04
8.38
5.67
5.61
4.59
4.31
4.29

MAE
5.31
5.89
4.55
4.32
3.66
3.22
3.19

Table 3. Result of Factor Order Ablation Study, where the
best results are marked in bold.
Factor Order Combination CCC RMSE MAE
1st + 2nd + 3rd
0.676 4.91
3.98
1st + 2nd
0.672 4.82
3.91
1st + 3rd
0.674 4.80
3.92
2st + 3rd
0.660 5.20
4.05
1st
0.661 4.83
3.90
2st
0.658 5.24
4.10
3st
0.656 4.89
3.95

3.4. Ablation Study for Factor Order
In order to further evaluate our model and understand the
fusion mechanism, we conducted ablation studies on the EDAIC-WOZ dataset to verify the role of each order in factor fusion. The results are shown in Table 3, we can be see
that: 1) the full set of factor combinations performs the best in
terms of CCC, the combination of 1st-order and 3rd-order factors achieves the best performance on RMSE, and the utilization of only the 1st-order factors performs the best on MAE.
In general, involving more levels of order combination tend
to improve the performance, and this demonstrates the necessity of integrating factors of different orders; 2) the CCC of
all ablation models are higher than 0.65, which demonstrates
the reliability of our model.

Table 4. Modality Contribution learned by our MMFF, where
the largest contribution is marked in bold.
Factor
text
audio
video
1st factor
24.5% 56.6% 18.9%
2nd factor 40.8% 34.7% 24.5%
3rd factor 27.7% 33.0% 39.3%
fusion
30.4% 42.5% 27.1%
3.5. Fusion Mechanism Analysis
As mentioned above, the contribution rate (γ 1 ,γ 2 ,γ 3 ,γ) obtained from the proxy can provide us with the mechanism
explanation of factor fusion to some extent. In this section,
we visualize the modality contributions on the E-DAIC-WOZ
dataset and analyze the fusion mechanism.
The weights of each modality on each order and the whole
process are shown in Table 4. It can be seen that the audio
(42.5%) is the most important modality, followed by the text
(30.4%) and video (27.1%). We also observe that the audio,
text, and video modalities have the largest contribution for the
1st-order, 2nd-order, and 3rd-order factors, respectively. This
indicates that the contributions of different modalities vary
when exploiting the interactions in terms of different orders.
Besides, the contribution of audio modality at the 1st, 2nd
and 3rd-order decreases (56.6% to 33.0%), and the contribution of text at the 2nd and 3rd-order decreases (40.8%,
27.7%), while the contribution of video at the 1st, 2nd and
3rd-order increases (18.9% to 39.3%). Therefore, we speculate that there is a layer-by-layer extraction mechanism in
our MMFF. That is, the information extracted by order t is
mainly the information that has not be fully extracted by the
order smaller than t, thus realizing the hierarchical and full
extraction of modality information.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a Multimodal Multi-order Factor Fusion (MMFF) method for depression diagnosis. Comprared with the existing approaches, our method can ensure
the full coverage of interactive information in different orders, while providing stronger interpretability. Experiments
conducted on two recent depression datasets show that our
MMFF is significantly superior to the state-of-the-art approaches. We also conduct analysis of the learned contribution of each factor and give a conjecture of the fusion mechanism (namely, order-hierarchical information extraction for
fusion). In the future, we intend to apply the proposed method
to more applications in addition to the depression diagnosis.
5. REFERENCES
[1] Fabien Ringeval, Björn Schuller, Michel Valstar,
Nicholas Cummins, Roddy Cowie, Leili Tavabi, et al.,

“Avec 2019 workshop and challenge: state-of-mind,
detecting depression with ai, and cross-cultural affect
recognition,” in AVEC2019, pp. 3–12.
[2] Mariana Rodrigues Makiuchi, Tifani Warnita, Kuniaki
Uto, and Koichi Shinoda, “Multimodal fusion of bertcnn and gated cnn representations for depression detection,” in AVEC2019, pp. 55–63.
[3] Weiquan Fan, Zhiwei He, Xiaofen Xing, Bolun Cai, and
Weirui Lu, “Multi-modality depression detection via
multi-scale temporal dilated cnns,” in AVEC2019, pp.
73–80.
[4] Hao Sun, Jiaqing Liu, Shurong Chai, Zhaolin Qiu, Lanfen Lin, Xinyin Huang, and Yenwei Chen, “Multimodal adaptive fusion transformer network for the estimation of depression level,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14,
pp. 4764, 2021.
[5] Guramritpal Singh Saggu, Keshav Gupta, and K. V.
Arya, “Depressnet: A multimodal hierarchical attention
mechanism approach for depression detection,” IJES,
2022.
[6] Hao Sun, Hongyi Wang, Jiaqing Liu, Yen-Wei Chen,
and Lanfen Lin, “Cubemlp: An mlp-based model for
multimodal sentiment analysis and depression estimation,” in ACM MM, 2022, pp. 3722–3729.
[7] Tao Gui, Liang Zhu, Qi Zhang, Minlong Peng, Xu Zhou,
Keyu Ding, and Zhigang Chen, “Cooperative multimodal approach to depression detection in twitter,”
AAAI, vol. 33, no. 01, pp. 110–117, Jul. 2019.
[8] Jonathan Gratch, Ron Artstein, Gale Lucas, Giota Stratou, et al., “The distress analysis interview corpus of
human and computer interviews,” Tech. Rep., University of Southern California Los Angeles, 2014.
[9] Bochao Zou, Jiali Han, Yingxue Wang, Rui Liu,
Shenghui Zhao, Lei Feng, Xiangwen Lyu, and Huimin
Ma, “Semi-structural interview-based chinese multimodal depression corpus towards automatic preliminary
screening of depressive disorders,” IEEE TAC, 2022.
[10] Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St. John, Noah Constant,
Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar, Brian
Strope, and Ray Kurzweil, “Universal sentence encoder
for English,” in EMNLP: System Demonstrations, Brussels, Belgium, Nov. 2018, pp. 169–174, ACL.
[11] Ziheng Zhang, Weizhe Lin, Mingyu Liu, and Marwa
Mahmoud, “Multimodal deep learning framework for
mental disorder recognition,” in FG. IEEE, 2020, pp.
344–350.
[12] Jin-Hwa Kim, Kyoung Woon On, Woosang Lim,
Jeonghee Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Byoung-Tak Zhang,
“Hadamard Product for Low-rank Bilinear Pooling,” in
ICLR, 2017.
[13] Shi Yin, Cong Liang, Heyan Ding, and Shangfei Wang,
“A multi-modal hierarchical recurrent neural network
for depression detection,” in AVEC2019, pp. 65–71.

[14] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in
CVPR, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[15] George Trigeorgis, Fabien Ringeval, Raymond Brueckner, Erik Marchi, Mihalis A Nicolaou, Björn Schuller,
and Stefanos Zafeiriou, “Adieu features? end-to-end
speech emotion recognition using a deep convolutional
recurrent network,” in ICASSP. IEEE, 2016, pp. 5200–
5204.
[16] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens Van Der Maaten, and
Kilian Q Weinberger, “Densely connected convolutional
networks,” in CVPR, 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[17] Zijun Sun, Xiaoya Li, Xiaofei Sun, Yuxian Meng, Xiang
Ao, Qing He, Fei Wu, and Jiwei Li, “ChineseBERT:
Chinese pretraining enhanced by glyph and Pinyin information,” Online, Aug. 2021, pp. 2065–2075, ACL.
[18] Gedas Bertasius, Heng Wang, and Lorenzo Torresani,
“Is space-time attention all you need for video understanding?,” in ICML, 2021, vol. 2, p. 4.
[19] Sami Abu-El-Haija, Nisarg Kothari, Joonseok Lee, Paul
Natsev, George Toderici, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, and

6. SUPPLYMENTARY MATERIAL
6.1. Details of Feature Extraction for Text Modality
Figure 6 is the pipeline of feature extration for the patient’s textual interview, where the Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) [10] is utilized to obtain embedding for each
sentence. USE is a classic sentence to vector encoder, which
obtain