Rethinking with Retrieval: Faithful Large Language Model Inference
Hangfeng He†∗
Hongming Zhang‡
Dan Roth§
†
‡
§
University of Rochester
Tencent AI Lab, Seattle
University of Pennsylvania
hanfeng.he@rochester.edu, hongmzhang@global.tencent.com
danroth@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Despite the success of large language models (LLMs) in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks, the stored knowledge
in these models may inevitably be incomplete, out-of-date, or incorrect. This motivates the need to utilize external knowledge to assist LLMs. Unfortunately, current
methods for incorporating external knowledge often require additional training or
fine-tuning, which can be costly and may
not be feasible for LLMs. To address this
issue, we propose a novel post-processing
approach, rethinking with retrieval (RR),
which retrieves relevant external knowledge
based on the decomposed reasoning steps
obtained from the chain-of-thought (CoT)
prompting. This lightweight approach does
not require additional training or fine-tuning
and is not limited by the input length of
LLMs. We evaluate the effectiveness of RR
through extensive experiments with GPT-3
on three complex reasoning tasks: commonsense reasoning, temporal reasoning, and
tabular reasoning. Our results show that RR
can produce more faithful explanations and
improve the performance of LLMs.1
Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown
exceptional performance across various tasks
through in-context learning without task-specific
training or fine-tuning (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022;
Ouyang et al., 2022). Recent progress in prompting (Wei et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Kojima
et al., 2022) and decoding (Wang et al., 2022) has
made it feasible for LLMs to tackle tasks that demand complex reasoning.
∗

Part of this work was done while the author was at the
University of Pennsylvania.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.
com/HornHehhf/RR.

(a)

Query

(b)

Query

(c)

Query

Chain of thought

Chain of thought

LLM

Prediction

LLM

Explanation + Prediction

LLM

Rethinking

Explanation + Prediction

Retrieval
Knowledge

Figure 1: An overview of three approaches for using
LLMs: (a) Standard prompting for generating a prediction in response to a query. (b) Chain-of-thought
prompting for generating both an explanation and a
prediction in response to a query. (c) Rethinking with
retrieval, our proposed approach for using the decomposed reasoning steps obtained from chain-of-thought
prompting to retrieve relevant external knowledge for
LLMs, leading to more faithful explanations and improved predictions in response to a query.

However, the knowledge stored in LLMs might
inevitably be incomplete, out-of-date, or incorrect.
As a result, external sources of knowledge, such
as Wikipedia, may be essential for the successful deployment of LLMs for real-world applications. Previously, people tried to utilize knowledge for smaller language models (LMs), such
as T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019). However,
these methods often require additional training or
fine-tuning, which can be costly and thus impractical for LLMs.
In this paper, we present a post-processing
approach called rethinking with retrieval (RR)
for utilizing external knowledge in LLMs. Our
method begins by using the chain-of-thought
(CoT) prompting method (Wei et al., 2022) to generate a diverse set of reasoning paths, as described
in Wang et al. (2022). We then use each reasoning step in those paths to retrieve relevant external knowledge, which enables RR to provide

more faithful explanations and more accurate predictions, as illustrated in Figure 1.
We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, RR, on three complex reasoning tasks:
commonsense reasoning, temporal reasoning, and
tabular reasoning, using GPT-3 175B (Brown
et al., 2020) and different external knowledge
sources: Wikipedia, Wikidata (Vrandečić and
Krötzsch, 2014), WordNet (Miller, 1995), and
Conceptnet (Speer et al., 2017). The results
demonstrate that RR consistently outperforms all
baselines on all three tasks without requiring additional training or fine-tuning, indicating the superiority of our approach in leveraging external
knowledge to enhance the performance of LLMs.
Related Work

Enhancing LMs through retrieval. Retrievalenhanced LMs have received significant attention
as a means of improving performance through the
incorporation of external knowledge. For example, the k-most similar training contexts can be retrieved to improve the estimation of the next word
distribution in both the training stage (Borgeaud
et al., 2021) and the inference stage (Khandelwal
et al., 2020). Furthermore, search query generators have been adopted to generate search queries
for search engines to retrieve relevant documents
(Komeili et al., 2022; Shuster et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022). Other approaches have utilized retrieved documents as the additional context in generation tasks (Joshi et al., 2020; Guu
et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020). Nakano et al.
(2021) instead use human feedback in a text-based
web-browsing environment. Among these previous works, Khandelwal et al. (2020) is most
closely related to our approach. However, they
focus on improving local inference by using the
nearest neighbor datastore constructed from training data, whereas we focus on conducting faithful inference using external knowledge. In contrast to other aforementioned approaches, which
require training or fine-tuning to incorporate retrieved knowledge, we propose a post-processing
method for leveraging retrieved knowledge without additional training or fine-tuning.
Incorporating external knowledge into LMs.
Significant effort has been devoted to leveraging
external knowledge to improve the reasoning ability of LMs. Previous work has incorporated external knowledge sources such as WordNet (Miller,

1995) and ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) to enhance LMs for tabular reasoning tasks (Neeraja
et al., 2021; Varun et al., 2022). Explicit rules
have also been added to inputs to improve reasoning ability over implicit knowledge (Talmor
et al., 2020). In addition, explicit knowledge from
Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch, 2014) and implicit knowledge in LLMs have been integrated
into a transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) for visual question answering (Gui et al., 2021). Nye
et al. (2021) instead introduces a symbolic reasoning module to improve coherence and consistency
in LLMs. Among these previous works, Nye et al.
(2021) is the most relevant to our approach. Still,
they focus on incorporating logical constraints to
improve coherence and consistency, whereas we
aim to improve the faithfulness of explanations
through the use of external knowledge. In contrast to other aforementioned approaches that incorporate external knowledge before generation
and require additional training or fine-tuning, our
proposal leverages external knowledge in a postprocessing manner to enhance LMs without additional training or fine-tuning.
Uncovering latent Knowledge in LLMs. There
has been a line of work exploring the knowledge
hidden within LLMs for reasoning. This has included the use of careful prompting to encourage
LLMs to generate explanations in the reasoning
process, such as through chain of thought prompting in few-shot (Wei et al., 2022) or zero-shot
(Kojima et al., 2022) learning, or through the use
of scratchpads for intermediate computation (Nye
et al., 2022). In addition, various methods based
on sampling a diverse set of reasoning paths in
LLMs have been proposed, including training verifiers to judge the correctness of model completions (Cobbe et al., 2021), calibrating model predictions based on the reliability of the explanations (Ye and Durrett, 2022), and promoting selfconsistency over diverse reasoning paths (Wang
et al., 2022). Zelikman et al. (2022) instead iteratively bootstrap the ability of LLMs to generate high-quality rationales from a few initial examples. Liu et al. (2022) further propose generating knowledge from LLMs, which is then used as
additional input to improve commonsense reasoning. In contrast to this line of work, our proposal
focuses on leveraging external knowledge to enhance LLMs, while they aim to explore the knowledge hidden within LLMs.
Rethinking with Retrieval

LLMs have been shown to generate incorrect supporting facts from time to time, even when they accurately capture the perspective needed to answer
a question. This phenomenon highlights intrinsic
issues in the way LLMs store and retrieve knowledge, including (1) the presence of out-of-date,
incorrect, or missing relevant knowledge in the
pre-training corpus; (2) incorrect memorization of
relevant knowledge during pre-training; and (3)
incorrect retrieval of relevant knowledge during
the inference stage. To address these issues, we
propose the use of RR, which leverages external
knowledge through the retrieval of relevant information based on decomposed reasoning steps.
Overview. Given a query Q, we utilize chain-ofthought prompting to generate a diverse set of reasoning paths R1 , R2 , · · · RN , where each reasoning path Ri consists of an explanation Ei followed
by a prediction Pi . After that, we retrieve relevant
knowledge K1 , · · · KM from a suitable knowledge
base KB to support the explanation in each reasoning path, and select the prediction P̂ that is most
faithful to this knowledge. To better illustrate our
proposal, we use “Did Aristotle use a laptop?” as
a running example in this work.
Chain-of-thought prompting. In contrast to
standard prompting, CoT prompting (Wei et al.,
2022) includes demonstrations of step-by-step reasoning examples in the prompt to produce a series
of short sentences that capture the reasoning process. For instance, given the question “Did Aristotle use a laptop?”, CoT prompting aims to generate the complete reasoning path “Aristotle died
in 322 BC. The first laptop was invented in 1980.
Thus, Aristotle did not use a laptop. So the answer
is no.” rather than simply outputs “No.” Empirical
results show that CoT prompting significantly improves the performance of LLMs on many multistep reasoning tasks. Therefore, we adopt CoT
prompting to obtain both explanation E and prediction P for the query Q.
Sampling diverse reasoning paths. Similar to
Wang et al. (2022), we sample a diverse set of reasoning paths R1 , R2 , · · · RN rather than only considering the greedy path as in Wei et al. (2022).
For the question “Did Aristotle use a laptop?”, the
potential reasoning paths can be as follows:
(R1 ) Aristotle died in 2000. The first laptop was

invented in 1980. Thus, Aristotle used a laptop. So the answer is yes.
(R2 ) Aristotle died in 322BC. The first laptop was
invented in 2000. Thus, Aristotle did not use
a laptop. So the answer is no.
(R3 ) Aristotle died in 322BC. The first laptop was
invented in 1980. Thus, Aristotle did not use
a laptop. So the answer is no.
Knowledge retrieval. Different knowledge
bases can be used to address different tasks. For
example, to address the question “Did Aristotle
use a laptop?”, we can use Wikipedia as the external knowledge base KB. Information retrieval
techniques can be applied to retrieve the relevant
knowledge K1 , · · · KM from Wikipedia based
on the decomposed reasoning steps. Ideally, we
would obtain the following two paragraphs from
Wikipedia for this question:
(K1 ) Aristotle (384–322 BC) was a Greek philosopher and polymath during the Classical period in Ancient Greece. ...
(K2 ) The Epson HX-20, the first laptop computer,
was invented in 1980. ...
Faithful inference. The faithfulness of each reasoning path Ri can be estimated using a function
fKB (Ri ), which is based on relevant knowledge
K1 , · · · , KM retrieved from the knowledge base
KB. The final prediction is obtained through the
application of the following inference procedure2 :
P̂ =

arg max

N
X

Pi ∈{P1 ,··· ,PN } i=1

1(Pi = P )fKB (Ri ), (1)

where Pi denotes the corresponding prediction in
the reasoning path Ri . This inference procedure
is designed to identify the most faithful prediction
P̂ to the knowledge base among all predictions in
the N reasoning paths. For instance, in the running example, given reasoning paths R1 , R2 , R3
and the retrieved knowledge K1 , K2 , the above inference procedure would output the prediction “So
the answer is no.”, as it is supported by both R2
and R3 and has a higher faithfulness score compared to the prediction “So the answer is yes.”,
which is only supported by R1 .
Note that this is the basic version of faithful inference,
and further variations can be found in Section 5.3.
Experiments

In this section, we present the evaluation of our
proposed method, RR, on three complex reasoning tasks: commonsense reasoning, temporal reasoning, and tabular reasoning.
4.1

Baselines

We compare with the following baselines.
Zero-shot/few-shot prompting. In our experiments, we consider GPT-3 with standard zeroshot/few-shot prompting as baselines, following
the approach described in Brown et al. (2020), in
which zero or few in-context exemplars of inputoutput pairs are provided in the prompt.
Chain-of-thought prompting. In addition to
the standard zero-shot/few-shot prompting, we
also consider GPT-3 with the CoT prompting proposed in (Wei et al., 2022) as a baseline in our experiments. This approach involves feeding LLMs
step-by-step reasoning examples instead of standard input-output examples.
Self-consistency. In addition, we also consider
self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022) as a baseline
in our experiments. This approach, proposed as an
alternative to the naive greedy decoding used in
CoT prompting (Wei et al., 2022), involves sampling a diverse set of reasoning paths and selecting the most consistent answer by marginalizing
the sampled paths.
4.2

Commonsense Reasoning

Dataset description. For commonsense reasoning, we consider the StrategyQA dataset (Geva
et al., 2021), which includes questions that require
implicit reasoning strategies. For example, the
question “Did Aristotle use a laptop?” requires
implicit decomposition into reasoning steps, while
the question “Was Aristotle alive when the laptop
was invented?” explicitly specifies the reasoning
process. The StrategyQA dataset includes 2, 290
training examples, each consisting of a question
(Q), a yes/no answer (A), a decomposition (D),
evidence paragraphs (E), and supporting facts (F).
On average, each question requires about 2.93 reasoning steps and 2.33 evidence paragraphs. In addition, a development set is constructed by randomly sampling 10% of the training examples
(i.e., 229 examples). The answer distribution is
roughly balanced, with approximately 47% "yes"
questions in both the training and development

sets. Unless otherwise specified, the models are
evaluated on the development set3 for StrategyQA.
Implementation details. In this part, we utilize Wikipedia as the external knowledge base
KB. For each sentence in the explanation of every reasoning path, we first apply BM25 (Robertson et al., 2009) to retrieve the top 10 most relevant paragraphs from Wikipedia. In particular, we
use the re-implementation of the sparse retrieval
BM254 in Karpukhin et al. (2020) from Pyserini
(Lin et al., 2021). Subsequently, we use the pretrained MPNet model (Song et al., 2020) to select the most similar paragraph based on the cosine
similarity between the sentence embeddings of the
retrieved paragraph and the sentence. We then
employ a pre-trained natural language inference
(NLI) model (Nie et al., 2020) to obtain the entailment and contradiction scores for the sentence,
treating the most similar paragraph as the premise.
The faithfulness of each reasoning path is then
calculated using fKB (·) based on the entailment
scores, contradiction scores, and MPNet similarities of all sentences in the explanation of the reasoning path. The final prediction for each question is obtained through faithful inference (Equation 1). More details about fKB (·) can be found in
Appendix A.2.
4.3

Temporal Reasoning

Dataset description. In this experiment, we use
the TempQuestions dataset (Jia et al., 2018) to
investigate temporal reasoning. This dataset includes 1, 271 temporal questions that are divided
into four classes: explicit temporal, implicit temporal, temporal answer, and ordinal constraints.
The questions are paired with their answers from
Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008). To examine the
most challenging aspect of temporal reasoning, we
focus on the set of implicit temporal questions,
which contain implicit temporal expressions, including free-text temporal expressions. For example, the question “who was governor of oregon
when shanghai noon was released?” is an implicit
temporal question. To facilitate our analysis, we
only consider questions with a single answer, resulting in a total of 175 examples. Of these ex3
As the annotations for the test set are not publicly available, we use the development set for evaluation. This allows
us to perform a more comprehensive analysis.
We also experimented with DPR and BM25+DPR, and
found that BM25 outperformed these methods in our experiments. More details can be found in Appendix A.3.

GPT-3

Methods

Commonsense

Temporal

Tabular

Zero-shot prompting
Few-shot prompting
Chain-of-thought prompting
Self-consistency
Rethinking with retrieval

58.08
63.32
65.94
73.36
77.73

28.40
29.59
33.14
37.28
39.05

82.00
83.08
83.33
84.00
84.83

Table 1: Performance of different methods using GPT-3 on three reasoning tasks.

amples, the first 6 are used for prompting, and the
remaining 169 are used for evaluation.
Implementation details. In this part, we utilize
Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch, 2014) as the
external knowledge base KB, as it is the largest
publicly available knowledge graph, and the data
from Freebase has been migrated to Wikidata. To
incorporate this knowledge into our system, we
apply an entity linking system5 to each sentence
in the explanation of each reasoning path to identify the corresponding Wikidata pages for all entities in the sentence. Next, we extract all temporal
relations from these relevant Wikidata pages and
use templates to convert these temporal relations
into sentences. This step generates a set of relevant knowledge sentences for each sentence in the
explanation of each reasoning path. The final prediction is then obtained by applying the procedure
described in Section 4.2, in which the retrieved
paragraphs are replaced with the relevant knowledge sentences from the current part.
4.4

Tabular Reasoning

Dataset description. We consider the INFOTABS dataset (Gupta et al., 2020) for tabular reasoning, which consists of 23, 738 humanwritten textual hypotheses based on premises in
the form of tables extracted from 2, 540 unique
Wikipedia info-boxes. We focus on the development set, which includes 1, 800 hypotheses based
on 200 tables, and only consider entailed and contradictory hypotheses as it is tricky to write CoT
demonstrations for neutral hypotheses. This results in a total of 1, 200 hypotheses based on 200
tables for evaluation, with an equal number of entailed and contradictory hypotheses.
Implementation details. In this part, we utilize
WordNet (Miller, 1995) and ConceptNet (Speer

et al., 2017) as external knowledge bases. To convert tables into textual premises, we follow the
same technique as in Varun et al. (2022). For each
premise-hypothesis pair, we follow the procedure
outlined in Varun et al. (2022) to retrieve relevant word relation triples that connect the premise
RelatedTo
and hypothesis words, such as “married”←−−−−→
“spouse”. These triples are then converted into
sentences using some simple templates. The resulting sentences, along with the textual premises
from the tables, serve as relevant knowledge for
each sentence in the explanation of each reasoning
path. To obtain the final prediction, the procedure
described in Section 4.2 is applied, whereby the
retrieved paragraphs in Section 4.2 are replaced
with the relevant knowledge from the current part.
4.5

Experimental settings. In all experiments, we
utilize GPT-3 text-davinci-002 unless otherwise stated. The maximum number of tokens for
generation during completion is set to 256. For
zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought prompting, the temperature is fixed at 0. For selfconsistency and rethinking with retrieval, we randomly sample 10 outputs6 with temperature 0.7.
Detailed prompts can be found in Appendix A.1.
We evaluate the performance of different methods
on commonsense and tabular reasoning using accuracy, and on temporal reasoning using the exact
match metric as defined in Rajpurkar et al. (2016).
Results. As shown in Table 1, our proposed
method, rethinking with retrieval, consistently
outperforms all baselines on all three reasoning
tasks without requiring additional training or finetuning. The results highlight the effectiveness of
our approach in leveraging external knowledge to
improve the performance of LLMs.
5

We use the spacy entity linker: https://pypi.org/
project/spacy-entity-linker/.

Evaluation

For commonsense reasoning, we sample 9 outputs, as we
have found that odd numbers of outputs tend to yield better
voting performance for self-consistency on StrategyQA.

Wrong supporting facts
Question

Was Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song a
collaboration with a member of The Lox?

Answer

No

Facts

Lil Jon’s highest ranked billboard song
was Yeah; Yeah was a collaboration between Lil Jon, Usher, and Ludacris; The
Lox is a rap trio consisting of: Styles P,
Sheek Louch, and Jadakiss.

GPT-3

Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song was
"Get Low" with the East Side Boyz. The
Lox is not a member of the East Side
Boyz. Thus, Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song was not a collaboration with
a member of The Lox. So the answer is
no.

Wrong inference
Would the top of Mount Fuji stick out of
the Sea of Japan?
Yes
The average depth of the Sea of Japan is
5,748 feet (1,752 metres) and its maximum depth is 12,276 feet (3,742 metres);
Mount Fuji is 3,776.24 metres (12,389.2
ft) tall.
Mount Fuji is 3,776 meters tall. The
Sea of Japan is about 3,741 meters deep.
Thus, the top of Mount Fuji would not
stick out of the Sea of Japan. So the answer is no.

Table 2: Examples of incorrect outputs from GPT-3 with CoT prompting.
Analysis

In this section, we perform a thorough analysis to
gain a deeper understanding of RR.
5.1

Limitations of LLMs in Reasoning

In this subsection, we present an analysis of GPT3 with CoT prompting on the StrategyQA dataset.
Upon closer examination of the outputs of GPT3, we observed that it can provide reasonable explanations and correct predictions for a number
of questions. For example, when given the question “Will the Albany in Georgia reach a hundred
thousand occupants before the one in New York?”,
GPT-3 produced the following output:
The Albany in New York has a population of about 98,000. The Albany
in Georgia has a population of about
77,000. Thus, the Albany in New York
is more populous than the Albany in
Georgia. So the answer is no.
The above output consists of three components:
(1) supporting facts (in cyan) that are based on a
particular perspective, (2) chaining arguments (in
orange), and (3) a prediction (in green). Components (1) and (2) contribute to the explanation.
Overall, the output exhibits a high level of quality.
However, we also observed that GPT-3 may occasionally produce incorrect supporting facts for its
explanations or make incorrect inferences for its

Retrieval
Query-based

Commonsense
73.36

Tabular
36.69

Decomposition-based

77.73

39.05

Table 3:
Comparison of query-based and
decomposition-based retrieval on commonsense
and tabular reasoning.

predictions, despite generally being able to identify suitable perspectives.
Wrong supporting facts. As shown in Table 2,
GPT-3 provides the incorrect supporting fact for
Lil Jon’s top-ranked Billboard song, stating that
it was “Get Low” instead of the correct answer,
“Yeah”. However, it does have the correct perspective on how to answer the question, “Was Lil
Jon’s top ranked Billboard song a collaboration
with a member of The Lox?”.
Wrong inference. As shown in Table 2, GPT-3
makes an incorrect inference, stating that the top
of Mount Fuji “would not stick out” of the Sea of
Japan, rather than the correct answer, “would stick
out”. However, it does provide correct supporting
facts based on the appropriate perspective for the
question, “Would the top of Mount Fuji stick out of
the Sea of Japan?”.
5.2

Ablation Study

Importance of decomposition-based retrieval.
In our proposed method, we retrieve relevant ex-

Knowledge
External

Tabular
79.92

Background

84.75

Background + External

84.83

Table 4: Performance of RR with different types of
knowledge on tabular reasoning: external only, background only, and a combination of both. External
knowledge refers to WordNet and ConceptNet, while
background knowledge refers to the tables.

ternal knowledge based on the decomposed reasoning steps rather than the original query. To further investigate the impact of this choice, we conducted additional experiments in which we used
the original query for knowledge retrieval while
keeping other aspects of our method unchanged.
As shown in Table 3, the results for these experiments are poor for both commonsense and temporal reasoning, indicating the importance of using
decomposition-based retrieval in our approach.
The impact of different types of knowledge.
For tabular reasoning, we use both external knowledge (WordNet and ConceptNet) and background
knowledge (tables) in our experiments. In this
section, we further examine the effect of different types of knowledge on the performance of our
proposed method. As shown in Table 4, the additional improvement gained by incorporating Wikidata and ConceptNet in addition to tables is limited, indicating that GPT-3 already captures many
word-level relations in these external knowledge
sources. In addition, the observed significant improvement in tabular reasoning from using tables
alone suggests that our proposed method can also
effectively leverage background knowledge.
5.3

Variations of the Proposed Approach

Basic approach: Weighting outputs. In Section 3, we present a basic version of our proposal
for taking advantage of external knowledge. Our
basic approach involves weighting outputs as individual units and using a voting mechanism to select the best-supported prediction. We can also directly choose the best-supported output, which includes both an explanation and a prediction, without using voting. For example, in the running
example of “Did Aristotle use a laptop?” (see
more in Section 3), the third reasoning path R3 is
the output most supported by the knowledge para-

graphs K1 and K2 .
Variant I: Fact selection. The first variant of
our approach involves selecting facts from the outputs of LLMs based on external knowledge. For
example, consider the running example of “Did
Aristotle use a laptop?”, where we only have access to the first two reasoning paths, R1 and R2 .
In this case, the first sentence in R2 and the second sentence in R1 are supported by knowledge
K1 and K2 , respectively. Therefore, the first variant would output the first sentence in R2 and the
second sentence in R1 as the supporting facts.
Variant II: Fact generation. The second variant of our approach involves generating facts
based on both the outputs of LLMs and external
knowledge. For example, consider the running example of “Did Aristotle use a laptop?”, where we
only have access to the first reasoning path R1 .
The second sentence in R1 is supported by the second knowledge paragraph K2 . However, the first
sentence is not supported by any evidence paragraphs. We can generate questions about the first
sentence, such as “When did Aristotle die?” and
use the first knowledge paragraph K1 to generate
a new fact: “Aristotle died in 322BC.”. As a result,
the second variant would output the generated fact
“Aristotle died in 322 BC.” and the second sentence in R1 as the supporting facts.
Inference with supporting facts. For the two
variants of our approach, we only have the supporting facts and need to perform a final inference
step to obtain the corresponding prediction. One
option for this inference is to use LLMs, but they
can be costly (Brown et al., 2020) or difficult to
use (Zhang et al., 2022). An alternative is to use an
off-the-shelf model for inference with supporting
facts, such as UnifiedQA (Khashabi et al., 2020,
2022). As discussed in Appendix A.5, UnifiedQA
is more robust to noisy supporting facts than GPT3. We thus use the second version of UnifiedQA,
UnifiedQA-v2 (Khashabi et al., 2022), for the final
step of inference.
Experimental settings. In this part, we focus
on commonsense reasoning and use the evidence
paragraphs provided in StrategyQA as the relevant knowledge, rather than the retrieved paragraphs discussed in Section 4.2. To evaluate the
quality of the explanations, we adopt the best metric for factual consistency evaluation in Honovich
55
Factuality (%)

Accuracy (%)
40
2.7B

6.7B

13B

30B
35
25

Chain-of-thought prompting
Rethinking with retrieval
1.3B
Chain-of-thought prompting
Rethinking with retrieval
1.3B

175B

2.7B

6.7B

13B

30B

Model Size

Model Size

(a) Accuracy of predictions

(b) Faithfulness of explanations

175B

Figure 2: The effect of LM size on the performance of our proposed method (Variant II) and CoT prompting. We
use various sizes of OPT models, with the exception of the 175B model, which is GPT-3.
Methods
CoT prompting

Accuracy (%)
65.94

Faithfulness (%)
38.73

Basic (w/o voting)

76.86

50.02

Variant I

78.60

54.11

Variant II

78.60

54.54

Table 5: Comparison of various variations of RR and
the CoT prompting baseline on StrategyQA using evidence paragraphs.

et al. (2022). For simplicity, we use the pre-trained
NLI model released by Nie et al. (2020) to compute the NLI-based metric, rather than fine-tuning
T5-11B (Raffel et al., 2020) ourselves. The implementation details of the two variants can be found
in Appendix A.4.
Results. Table 5 illustrates that the fact selection and fact generation variants of our proposal
improve the faithfulness of the supporting facts in
explanations, leading to increased prediction accuracy compared to the basic approach without
voting. Across all variations of our proposal, we
observe significant improvements in both prediction accuracy and the faithfulness of explanations
when compared to the CoT prompting baseline.
The incorporation of a voting mechanism leads
to an increased prediction accuracy of 79.91% for
the basic approach. Comparison with the performance (i.e., 77.73%) of the same approach using retrieved paragraphs rather than evidence paragraphs in Table 1 demonstrates that retrieved paragraphs are also effective for our proposal, as both
significantly outperform the voting baseline, selfconsistency (i.e., 73.36%), as shown in Table 1.

It is noteworthy that UnifiedQA performs
poorly on StrategyQA, achieving an accuracy of
only 58.95%. However, when provided with
gold supporting facts in StrategyQA, UnifiedQA
demonstrates excellent performance with an accuracy of 90.83%. This suggests that UnifiedQA is
suitable for last-step inference, but not effective
for answering questions in StrategyQA.
5.4

Impact of the Size of LMs

In this subsection, we examine the effect of the
size of LMs on the performance of our proposed
method, specifically in the context of the fact generation variant. We compare the performance of
our method using various sizes of OPT models
(Zhang et al., 2022) in addition to GPT-3 (175B)
using the same experimental setup as in Section 5.3. As shown in Figure 2, our proposed
method (Variant II) consistently outperforms CoT
prompting in terms of both prediction accuracy
and the faithfulness of explanations, even when
using smaller LMs.
Conclusion

In conclusion, the proposed approach is a promising solution for utilizing external knowledge to assist LLMs. Unlike traditional methods, RR does
not require additional training or fine-tuning, making it a lightweight and feasible option for LLMs.
Through extensive experiments on three reasoning tasks using GPT-3, we have shown that RR is
able to produce more faithful explanations and improve the performance of LLMs. In the future, we
plan to investigate various variations of RR to enhance its effectiveness and efficiency in augmenting LLMs with external knowledge.